AGREEMENT
by and between
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
and
THE GRADUATE EMPLOYEES’ ORGANIZATION
GEO
Local 6297
IFT-AFT, AFL-CIO
Effective August 16, 2022 through August 15, 2025

Agreement
by and between
The Board of Trustees
of the University of Illinois
and
The Graduate Employees’ Organization
GEO
Local 6297
IFT-AFT, AFL-CIO
This Agreement is made and entered into by and between the Board of Trustees of the
University of Illinois, a corporate and body politic (hereinafter referred to as the
“University”), and the Graduate Employees’ Organization (hereinafter referred to as the
“Union”), representing certain graduate employees of the University at the University of
Illinois at Chicago (“UIC”) as identified in Article II hereof.

Table of Contents
PAGE
I. Purpose.......................................................................................1
II. Recognition ................................................................................1
III. Appointment Terms ....................................................................2
IV. Management Rights ....................................................................7
V. Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment....................................9
VI. Training....................................................................................11
VII. Evaluation ................................................................................12
VIII. Hours of Work and Class Size ...................................................13
IX. Additional Employment ............................................................14
X. Employee Rights.......................................................................14
XI. Union Rights.............................................................................15
XII. Wages ......................................................................................17
XIII. Health Care...............................................................................17
XIV. Expenses ..................................................................................19
XV. Leaves and Holidays .................................................................20
XVI. Dues Deduction ........................................................................22
XVII. TA/GA Work Rules ..................................................................24
XVIII. Access to Personnel File............................................................24
XIX. Health and Safety ......................................................................24
XX. Labor–Management Meetings and Consultation .........................25
XXI. Discipline and Dismissal ...........................................................26
XXII. Grievance Procedure .................................................................27
XXIII. Electronic Availability of the Agreement ...................................31
XXIV. No Strike/No Lockout ...............................................................31
XXV. Savings.....................................................................................31
XXVI. Entire Agreement ......................................................................31
XXVII. Duration ...................................................................................32
SIDE LETTER (9-MONTH APPOINTMENTS) .........................................................34
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ...............................................................35
i

I. Purpose
A. This Agreement has as its purpose and intent the promotion of sound and mutually
beneficial relations between the University and the Union.
B. This Agreement is intended to establish the wages, hours and terms and conditions of
employment and the procedure for equitable resolution of differences. To this end, both
parties mutually enter into this Agreement and commit to the upholding of the
cooperative relationships between the University and the Union that this Agreement
represents.
II. Recognition
A. The University hereby recognizes the Graduate Employees’ Organization Local 6297
IFT-AFT, AFL-CIO as the exclusive representative for wages, hours and working
conditions for all employees within the bargaining unit as certified on September 2, 2021,
in Case No. 2021-RS-0015-C, as follows:
Included: All employees holding graduate assistantship appointments the total of which
is at least .25 full time equivalency and no greater than .67 full time equivalency or who
otherwise are granted a tuition waiver and who perform the duties of a Teaching
Assistant or Graduate Assistant for the University at UIC.
Excluded: All employees holding graduate assistantship appointments of less than .25
full time equivalency or greater than .67 full time equivalency or who perform the duties
of a Research Assistant but do not perform the duties of a Teaching Assistant or Graduate
Assistant for the Employer; supervisors, managers and confidential employees as defined
by the Act; and all other employees.
B. Teaching assistant duties include, but are not limited to, duties primarily in support of
instruction and educational services such as: leading discussion sections; leading class
discussions; holding lectures; the design of course materials; exam preparation;
proctoring and grading assignments or exams; holding office hours; note-taking; meeting
special needs of students with disabilities; and/or any other educational activity or service
provided.
C. Graduate assistant duties include, but are not limited to, duties primarily in support of
administrative functions, such as: clerical support (copying course materials, general
office work/clerical/receptionist, correspondence, and supervising reading room);
technical/support services; webmaster/assisting faculty with web pages, network
administration/end user support, equipment management, monitoring instructional and
service labs (computer, video, etc.); translation; routine support for publications (record
keeping, writing copy for university or department newsletters or non-research
publications, correspondence, etc.); advising/providing curricular and academic advice to
students, providing support to advisors; and outreach duties (recruiting students,
1

publicizing programs and activities to campus and public constituencies, and working
with/assisting with event management).
D. The duties set forth above are not intended to establish exclusive duties for assistants
assigned these titles but are established to denote principal functions. Additionally, any
dispute arising as to whether an assistant’s position is appropriately included in or
excluded from the bargaining unit may be raised through the grievance procedure in this
Agreement, except only to the third level and not to arbitration. If the Union is not
satisfied with the resolution at the third level, the Union may pursue remedies under the
Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act.
E. The University agrees not to negotiate with any other labor organization, its agent,
any employee organization, or campus organization over wages, hours and terms and
conditions of employment for the employees within the bargaining unit. This Agreement
shall not be construed to prevent the University or any administrator or faculty or staff
member from meeting with any University organization or group, including student
organizations, to hear their views on any matters.
III. Appointment Terms
A. Eligibility for Assistant Appointments
To be eligible for an assistant appointment, a TA or GA must be enrolled as a student and
in good academic standing in a graduate program at UIC and meet other applicable
requirements. For summer assistantships, assistants are not required to be registered
during the summer if they were registered for the immediately preceding semester or are
registered for the fall semester. If an individual who has accepted a TA or GA
appointment fails to enroll, withdraws or otherwise fails to maintain academic eligibility
in a graduate program, the University may, at its sole discretion and not subject to appeal
under the Grievance Procedure, cancel the assistantship appointment. Only degree-
seeking students may be eligible for an assistantship. Assistants who are determined to be
ineligible for an assistantship appointment after the start date of their appointment shall
be paid in full for all work performed on a pro-rata basis unless such ineligibility is based
on an international student’s legal visa status barring employment.
B. Required Documentation
All appointments are contingent upon the applicant’s compliance with documentation
requirements for employment. Currently these requirements include (for applicants who
have never held an assistantship or other appointment at the University or have not held
an appointment in the last 90 days) completion of the I-9 and employee information
forms as soon as possible, and in every case, before the assistant performs any services
associated with the appointment.
2

C. Notice of Appointment
1. All newly appointed and re-appointed TAs and GAs shall receive a letter of
appointment which specifies the appointment title, wage amount, effective dates
(duration) of service (including any mandatory or optional orientation sessions),
the name and phone number of the supervising official in the department, the full-
time equivalence (FTE) of the appointment, tuition and fee waiver, and the major
components of the assignment. The general hours of work and specific work
assignment will be described by the supervisor. Assignments may be changed at
the discretion of the department with notice to the assistant. TAs may submit, for
consideration, course placement preferences in writing.
2. The letter of appointment shall be issued no later than 45 days before the start of
the appointment. In the case of appointments made less than forty five (45) days
before or forty five (45) days after the beginning of the semester, the letter of
appointment shall be issued as soon as practicable. Upon request of the Union,
Campus Human Resources will conduct an audit of offer letters issued by
departments considered by the Union to have repeatedly issued letters of
appointment less than 45 days prior to the start of the appointment. When a
pattern of late offer letters has been ascertained by audit, a joint meeting will be
held for purposes of addressing the reasons for late offers. These meetings shall
include the Department Head or designee, a representative from Campus Human
Resources and a representative of the Union. All letters of appointment shall
include the following statement: “The terms and conditions of employment,
including but not limited to benefits and wages, for this appointment are governed
by a collective bargaining agreement between the Board of Trustees of the
University of Illinois and the Graduate Employees’ Organization, which may be
found at the following web address:
https://uofi.box.com/s/gyscndjeq71l8bvyij27o1sldcdihvu1
3. Appointing units shall use the template letter of appointment as provided on the
Campus Human Resources website. The letter will include notification of tuition
differential and taxation information for those appointments subject to taxation of
tuition waivers or assessment of tuition differentials. The letter will also identify
any contingencies or documents required to be completed prior to employment.
https://hr.uic.edu/hr-staff-managers/resources/template-letters/
4. Departments and units shall post unfilled available Assistantships for which no
preferred candidate has been identified on the Campus Human Resources job
board for applicant consideration.
https://jobs.uic.edu/job-board?&start=1&per=5000
D. Acceptance
A student who has been offered a TA or GA appointment is required to confirm
acceptance to the department in writing or by electronic mail within the time period
3

specified by the department. Acceptance of an appointment requires the assistant to be
present and available to perform assigned duties during those dates. Failure to be present
to perform assigned duties may result in the termination of the appointment. The
University recognizes that there may be circumstances beyond the assistant’s control and
the University may consider those circumstances in determining whether to hold open the
appointment. These circumstances may include international students whose visas, or
other required documents, are delayed in processing.
E. Duration of Employment
1. An assistant shall be employed for a specific period of not less than one semester
or for a special limited purpose. A special limited purpose is employment that: a)
covers unexpected needs arising during a semester and whose duration is less than
a semester, or b) is supported by a grant or contract whose duration is less than
one semester. In all cases, employment begins and ends according to the
employment period specified in the appointment letter or when the special limited
purpose is complete.
2. If the position accepted by the assistant for one or more specific periods in an
academic year later becomes unavailable, the University shall notify the assistant
of the reason for such unavailability, and the University shall ensure that the
assistant is placed into a position of equivalent appointment percentage or
compensation or provide equivalent compensation in lieu of the appointment for
the specific period offered and accepted by the assistant. No registration is
required as a condition of summer employment as an assistant.
F. Resignation/Release
A written release from the appointing unit is required if an assistant wishes to resign after
acceptance of an appointment in order to accept another assistantship appointment.
Assistants must provide a minimum of fourteen (14) days’ notice prior to the effective
date of any such resignation.
G. Considerations for Appointments and Assignments
The University will urge departments to develop guidelines for use in the determination
of appointments and assignments. The appointment/reappointment guidelines developed
by departments with 10 or more TAs or 10 or more GAs shall be transparent and
provided to assistants. The guidelines may differ among departments and may include
consideration of the following factors, but not limited to:
1) Eligibility;
2) Academic record;
3) Application procedures;
4) Letters of recommendation;
5) Previous relevant experience;
4

6) Factors which may enhance the applicant’s eligibility for appointment or specific
course assignments;
7) Factors that may be relevant for specific appointment timeframes; and/or
8) Factors related to the academic mission of the department
Each department will post its appointment and reappointment policy to its website. In
developing or revising appointment and reappointment policies, the Department Head
will solicit the advice of graduate student employees, when applicable. Appointments and
assignments will not be made in an arbitrary or capricious manner.
H. Renewal of Appointments
Assistants whose academic progress and service record have been determined to be
satisfactory are eligible for reappointment at the sole discretion of the University, subject
to the criteria provided for in Article III – Section G, based on the past performance and
service of the assistant, availability of funds, the University’s determination of the need
for service, or other factors. Departments have differing policies on the length of time
students may hold assistantships and may limit the total number of semesters that an
assistant may serve. In accordance with the University’s standard of excellence, assistants
must maintain a high standard of performance in their duties in order for their
assignments to be considered for renewal.
I. Fees, Assessments and Associated Costs
1. Assistants covered by this Agreement have graduate assistant appointments which
are no less than .25 FTE and no greater than .67 FTE, or who otherwise are
granted a tuition waiver and who perform the duties of a Teaching Assistant (TA)
or Graduate Assistant (GA) for the University of Illinois at Chicago. During the
term of this Agreement, tuition waivers will be guaranteed to teaching and
graduate assistants holding a .25 to .67 FTE appointment. Once enrolled in a
graduate program, students will be governed by the tuition waiver policy in effect
at the time of their first enrollment in that program, as long as they remain in that
program, are in good academic standing, and are making appropriate progress
towards graduation in that program, even if later modifications to the program
should occur.
2. Assistants covered under this Agreement shall have the following fees and
assessments waived:
a. Service Fee;
b. Health Service Fee;
c. Academic Facilities and Maintenance Assessment; and
d. Library and Information Technology Assessment
3. Any new fee created after the ratification and execution of this Agreement shall
be waived for the duration of this Agreement.
5

4. International Student Fee -For International students covered under this
Agreement, the University shall waive $65 of the International Student Fee for
each Fall and Spring semester during the term of the Agreement. Any increase to
the International Fee during the term of this Agreement shall also be waived.
5. During the term of this Agreement, if the General Fee increases more than $25
per semester, the Union reserves the right to bargain the additional increase.
6. UIC agrees to be available once per semester during the term of this Agreement
on request of the Union to discuss issues relating to differentials, waivers,
assessments and fees. Two weeks prior to the meeting the Union shall provide an
agenda detailing the issues to be discussed so that UIC can prepare the
appropriate materials and individuals to respond. UIC shall make a good faith
effort to provide at the meeting the materials and individuals necessary to respond
to the issues raised in the Union’s agenda. Any resolution or agreements made as
a result of these meetings shall be reduced in writing and signed by
representatives from the Union and the Campus.
7. Upon request of the Union to the Labor and Employee Relations Office, the
Union shall designate two (2) assistants to meet with University officials from
Labor and Employee Relations and from the Office of International Services once
per year for the purpose of providing input to the University with respect to
service and fees. Two (2) weeks prior to the meeting, the Union shall provide an
agenda detailing the issues to be discussed at the meeting.
J. Campus Housing
A Campus Housing Graduate Assistant living in the residence halls who violates Campus
Housing Policy will be subject to the Housing disciplinary regulations, including possible
fine or eviction if the violation is not job related. However, if the violation is job related,
discipline or fines imposed shall be subject to the Discipline, Dismissal and Grievance
Procedures in accordance with this Agreement.
K. Campus Parking Services
1. During the term of this Agreement the University shall have the right to raise
parking fees for bargaining unit employees by 4%. If the percentage increase
exceeds 4% during any contract year during the term of the Agreement, the Union
reserves the right to bargain the additional increase. If the University agrees to a
lower parking fee for another group of employees the reduced fee shall be
applicable to bargaining unit employees. This does not include police officers,
corporals, sergeants, or lieutenants who have the right to pursue interest
arbitration.
6

2. During the term of this Agreement, the University reserves the right to change the
terms for parking assignments and the availability for the use of university lots
and/or stations, with the following stipulations.
a. An assistant shall be entitled to reimbursement from their department for parking
fees under the following circumstances:
1. The assistant is specifically required by their supervisor to use their personal
vehicle when performing a specific assignment within the course of their
employment as an assistant and the supervisor authorizes the incurred
parking fees.
2. Reimbursement is authorized by the Unit Executive Officer or authorized
delegate.
3. An accurate claim with receipt for reimbursement is submitted by the
assistant.
b. Discipline and/or fines levied by Campus Parking, incurred in the course of
employment, shall be subject to the Discipline and Dismissal and Grievance
Procedure articles of this Agreement.
c. Assistants shall have the right to elect payroll deduction for payment of parking
fees.
IV.Management Rights
A. Except as specifically abridged by this Agreement, all powers, rights, and authority of
the University are reserved by the University, and the University retains sole and
exclusive control over any and all matters in the operation, management, and
administration of the University; the control of its properties and the maintenance of
order and efficiency of the workforce; and complete authority to exercise those rights and
powers by making and implementing decisions with respect to those rights and powers.
Such rights and powers include, but are not limited to, the exclusive right and power:
1. To determine the mission of the University, the organizational structure, and the
methods and means necessary to fulfill that mission, including the transfer,
alteration, curtailment, or discontinuance of any services;
2. To adopt and amend budgets and make budgetary allocations or reallocations
affecting the University as a whole or any of its departments or units;
3. To establish qualifications, appoint, and determine the FTE and duration of
employment upon appointment for all assistants, including whether assistants will
be reappointed and, if so, the terms and conditions governing such reappointment;
7

4. To determine the number of assistants to be appointed or reappointed and to
relieve assistants from duty due to lack of work or funds without diminishment of
the duration or payment of wages during an active appointment;
5. To determine, assign, and schedule the type and kind of services and the work to
be performed by assistants or by others, including the job content and the location
of such services or work;
6. To establish, modify, combine or eliminate job classifications;
7. To determine the number, location, or relocation or facilities, buildings and
rooms, and ancillary facilities such as parking lots, including the policies
governing the use of such buildings, rooms or facilities;
8. To discipline, suspend, or discharge assistants for just cause;
9. To supervise, train, and evaluate assistants;
10. To determine materials and equipment to be utilized by assistants and the methods
and means by which work shall be performed and services provided;
11. To establish quality and performance standards for assistants;
12. To adopt and enforce policies, rules, and regulations, including rules and
regulations governing tuition waivers and the work, training, and conduct of
assistants; and
13. To perform all other functions inherent in the administration, management, and
control of the University.
B. The University and the Union agree that academic freedom is one of the values
essential to higher education. It is further agreed, except as abridged by the specific terms
of this Agreement, that the University retains sole and exclusive control:
1. To make all academic judgments concerning: (a) courses, curriculum, and
instruction; (b) the content of courses; (c) methods of instruction; (d) instructional
materials; (e) the nature and the form of assignments required including
examinations and other work; (f) class size; (g) grading policies and practices;
2. To determine all academic policies, procedures, rules and regulations in regard to
assistants’ status as students including, but not limited to, all questions of
academic standing, intellectual integrity, and any matter relating to academic
progress in a university educational program;
8

3. To make academic evaluations and determinations as to the fulfillment of degree
requirements, including the relationship between work performance and progress
toward degree requirements.
C. Nothing in this clause waives the Union’s right to negotiate mandatory subjects of
bargaining.
V.Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment
A. There will be no discrimination by either the Union or University against any person
because of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender (including gender identity and gender expression), age, disability (including
mental and physical), marital status, order of protection status, genetic information,
veteran status, ancestry, unfavorable discharge from the military, citizenship or
immigration status, arrest record, or status as a protected veteran. The parties agree that
personnel decisions, including reappointment, shall be based solely on job and academic-
related criteria and performance.
B. Harassment is defined as unwelcome conduct that is based on the actual or perceived
categories above that has the purpose or effect of: 1) becoming a condition of continued
employment; or 2) is sufficiently severe or pervasive to substantially interfere with the
individual's work performance or create what a reasonable person would consider an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. For purposes of this definition, the
phrase "working environment" is not limited to a physical location an employee is
assigned to perform their duties.
C. There shall be no discrimination against any employee because of Union membership
or because the employee is acting as a representative of the Union or its members or other
graduate employees pursuant to the Agreement or policies or rules.
D. The University of Illinois and the Union will not tolerate sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment and sexual misconduct are defined in the University’s Comprehensive
Policy and Procedures for Sexual Misconduct Grievance Process. The University’s
policy can be found on the Office of Access and Equity (OAE) website. The University
considers such behavior, whether physical or verbal, to be a breach of its standards of
conduct.
E. The University will take action to provide remedies when such unlawful
discrimination and/or harassment is properly reported or discovered as provided by
law, and University policy. The University considers the behavior laid out in Sections
A-D to be a breach of its standards of conduct. The University and the Union are
committed to eliminating unlawful discrimination and to that end the Union may
designate two (2) members of the Union to meet with the OAE for the purpose of
providing input and policy recommendations once per year at the request of the Union.
Topics at this meeting may include the Gender Inclusive Resources available at
http://oae.uic.edu/resources/gender-inclusive-resources/. OAE investigates claims of
9

discrimination and harassment in accordance with University policy, and applicable
law.
F. In any proceedings regarding a sexual harassment and/or discrimination complaint, a
graduate employee may choose to have a Union representative serve to advise, represent,
and support the graduate assistant who is filing a complaint in accordance with the
relevant University policies and this Agreement.
G. The University of Illinois and the Union do not condone workplace bullying and
will uphold the principles of the University Code of Conduct for all those acting on
behalf of the University in a professional setting. This Code of Conduct can be
found here:
https://www.ethics.uillinois.edu/compliance/university_code_of_conduct.
H. The University prohibits unlawful retaliation for participating in a protected
activity. The University’s retaliation policy can be found at:
https://oae.uic.edu/policies/prohibition-of-retaliation/.
I. Supportive Measures
Graduate assistants who may have experienced sexual harassment and/or
discrimination at the University may request workplace supportive measures (e.g.,
moving office spaces, counseling, modification of work schedules/assignments or
restrictions on contact between the parties). Graduate assistants may submit a
request for supportive measures to OAE, Campus Advocacy Network (CAN) or the
relevant department chair, program director or unit head (collectively, the
“supervisor”). The graduate assistant may choose to have a Union representative
and/or CAN advocate present at that meeting. No workplace supportive measure
shall result in loss of pay for the graduate assistant who may have experienced
sexual harassment, harassment, or unlawful discrimination, except if a graduate
assistant chooses to either request a reduction in work hours and/or to take a
voluntary leave of absence and such leave is approved. Decisions regarding a
request for supportive measures, pursuant to this section of the Agreement, shall be
made by the supervisor (where appropriate) in consultation with OAE. A graduate
assistant’s request for supportive measures that does not require mandatory
reporting shall not result in a formal report filed to OAE unless requested by the
graduate assistant. Requests for supportive measures will not be unreasonably
denied. If a graduate assistant’s request for supportive measures is denied, a
graduate assistant can request a review of the decision with OAE and have a union
representative present at the meeting. Decisions on supportive measures are not
subject to the grievance procedure and arbitration.
J. The University and the Union agree that the language of this Agreement shall be
interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act, and with applicable federal and state non-discrimination, equal
opportunity and affirmative action laws, including those prohibiting unlawful
10

retaliation against individuals for the exercise of rights under those laws. Accordingly,
the University will follow all relevant laws regarding the provision of lactation
facilities to assistants.
K. If a graduate assistant decides to pursue a complaint through OAE, the University
shall notify the graduate assistant that OAE has an investigatory role but does not
represent either the complainant or respondent.
L. In cases when a determination is made not to investigate, OAE will provide the
complainant the reason within 10 business days, excluding University-recognized
holidays.
M. The University shall maintain webpages listing the all-gender bathroom locations and
established lactation stations of which the University is aware during the term of this
Agreement.
VI. Training
A. The University is responsible for establishing orientation/training for the incoming
assistants. Training/orientation may include: classroom diversity, strategies for dealing
with hostile students, methods for stimulating class discussion, teaching tactics specific to
the disciplinary area of the department and/or other duties related to the assistant’s
appointment and used by the department. The units that appoint GAs are responsible for
providing appropriate orientation and training related to the assistant’s duties.
B. Assistant’s may request additional follow-up training.
C. Orientation and training shall normally be conducted during the appointment. The
time the assistant spends in orientation and training will be counted toward the assistant’s
required hours. In the event that mandatory orientation/training occurs before the
assistant’s appointment term, the assistant will be compensated at a rate proportional to
the assistant’s wages for time spent in mandatory orientation and training only.
D. Departments may utilize returning assistants as training facilitators. The time that the
assistant spends preparing for and facilitating training will count toward the assistant’s
appointment hours. In the event that an assistant conducting preparation and facilitation
of training occurs before the assistant’s appointment term, the assistant will be
compensated at a rate proportional to the assistant’s wages for time spent in preparation
and facilitation of training.
E. Attendance at mandatory orientation/training activities is required for continuation of
a teaching/graduate assistantship. An assistant who is unable to attend a mandatory
training activity due to jury duty, military, parental or bereavement leave, as verified by
appropriate documentation, may be required to attend mandatory make-up training.
11

F. University regulations require all non-native English speaking teaching assistants who
provide instruction to be certified by the University as proficient in oral communication
in English. The University shall determine the procedures for certification. For assistants
so certified, oral proficiency in English shall not be the sole basis for discipline,
dismissal, or non-renewal. If an offer of appointment is conditional upon the assistant
being certified by the University as being proficient in English oral communication, that
condition must be stated in writing in the original offer. If a unit fails to stipulate this
condition in writing in the offer of appointment and the assistant attempts but fails to
meet the University’s certification requirements, then provided the assistant meets all
other conditions of the offer, the unit must appoint the assistant to a non-instructional
assistantship of the same term and compensation as the original offer. Assistants not
certified by the University as proficient in English communication and those with
conditional certification are required to complete a University-approved training program
before retaking any certification tests. At the Union’s request, once every three years, the
University shall meet with the Union, if requested, to discuss issues related to
certification in oral communication.
G. When an assistant is required to take a University-approved training program or
certification test for English proficiency, the training or certification test will be at no cost
to the assistant.
VII. Evaluation
A. Evaluations shall be undertaken in a non-arbitrary manner. The University shall
inform assistants of any evaluation process. Such evaluation processes shall be clearly
explained in writing by the University and made available to assistants at the start of the
period for which they are being evaluated. The University will attempt to review an
assistant's performance at least once during the academic year or term of appointment.
B. If the TA evaluation process involves classroom observations by a supervising staff or
faculty member, then the TA shall be notified of such visits at least one week in advance.
Upon the TA's request, evaluators shall meet with the TA after the classroom evaluation.
C. When the University completes an evaluation, a written report will be submitted for
placement in the evaluated assistant's employment file. A copy of the report shall be
provided to the assistant. The assistant shall have the right to compose a written response
to be placed in the assistant's employment file.
D. All evaluative material to be placed in the employment file shall be signed and dated
by the assistant and the supervisor. It is understood that the assistant's signature confirms
only that the supervisor has given a copy to the assistant and does not indicate agreement
or disagreement with the contents of the evaluation.
E. Deficiencies noted in an assistant's evaluation shall include specific recommendations
for improvement and may include a time frame in which the assistant is expected to
12

remedy such deficiencies. Additional training to remedy noted deficiencies may be
provided to the assistant.
VIII. Hours of Work and Class Size
A. Assistants’ hours of work are reflected in their percentage of appointment. Such hours
of work are separate and distinct from the time required for an assistant’s own academic
coursework. The appointment level (full time equivalency or FTE) shall be based on the
appointing department’s determination of the amount of time it should normally take to
perform the assigned duties including orientation and training. It is expected that a .5 FTE
assistant will devote an average of 20 hours per week over the course of a full
appointment period. Assistants appointed for other FTE levels would be expected to
perform work for a proportionately greater or lesser average number of hours per week.
The actual number of weekly hours of work are expected to vary over the course of the
appointment term.
B. It is understood that assistants in the bargaining unit are engaged in professional
activities of such a nature that the output produced, or the result accomplished, cannot be
precisely standardized or measured in relation to a given period of time, and that the time
necessary to accomplish an assignment may vary.
C. An assistant may object to a workload that causes their hours of work to exceed the
hours expected for the FTE of their appointment, as provided above, if the assistant
reasonably believes that their duties require hours that exceed the hours of effort required
by the appointment percentage or constitute an arbitrary or capricious workload. The
assistant must raise the matter with their department supervisor. Following the meeting
with the assistant, if the department supervisor concludes that the assistant is working
excessive hours based on their assigned FTE, the supervisor shall recommend: (1) that
the assistant conform to the hours normally needed by assistants with similar duties; (2)
that certain duties be reduced and/or reassigned to others; (3) that the assistant’s FTE be
increased; or (4) that the assistant be reassigned with consultation to a different position
with equivalent appointment terms. Should the appropriate department supervisor fail to
resolve the issue of excessive hours of work to the mutual satisfaction of both parties, the
assistant shall have the option of pursuing the matter through the Grievance Procedure in
accordance with Article XXII of this Agreement.
D. Employment and course assignments shall be offered to the assistant in a timely
fashion and as quickly as practically possible, to allow for adequate preparation. If course
assignments offered in writing are subsequently changed, the hours spent in preparation
for the original assignment shall be credited for the purpose of determining workload.
When there is a pattern of late assignment changes in a department less than five (5)
business days before the start of classes, a meeting shall be held for purposes of
addressing the reason. These meetings shall include the Department Head or designee
and a representative from the Union. Course assignments shall not be made in a
capricious manner.
13

E. All duties required by the supervising staff member, department, college, or
University, or otherwise required for an assistant to adequately perform their
appointment, including but not limited to orientations, required meetings, or preparation,
except for courses for which academic credit is given, shall be included in the calculation
of average hours specified in Section A and shall fall within the range of duties for TAs
and GAs.
F. Class Size
1. Each unit that employs Teaching Assistants shall establish a class size policy for
classes to which Teaching Assistants are assigned. For units with such a policy,
the class size policy shall be provided to any assistant upon request. No TA shall
be required to accept enrollees in excess of the maximum class, section, recitation
or lab size.
2. No assistant shall be required to accept enrollees in excess of the maximum room
capacity as limited by applicable law and assistants may raise issues concerning
the number of enrollees assigned with the Unit Executive Officer and/or in Labor-
Management meetings.
G. In assigning duties to Teaching and Graduate Assistants, the appointing unit and
supervisor shall establish the required duties of the assistant, and the supervisor shall
discuss these duties with the assistant at the beginning of the appointment period.
IX. Additional Employment
While assistants may seek and hold employment outside the University, the parties
recognize and agree that the assistant’s first obligation and commitment is to the
University. An assistant shall not utilize University of Illinois’ course materials,
curricula, facilities, resources or other materials in non-University employment.
X. Employee Rights
A. An assistant’s department or unit shall make arrangements for the assistant’s access to
their office, lab, studio or classroom, or similar workplace.
B. Each department or unit shall make available a designated mailbox for assistants to
receive mail. A department or unit will provide access to telephones, computers, internet,
email, a desk or work surface, and secured storage as necessary to fulfill the assistant’s
work obligations as determined by the University. A department or unit may provide
individual mailboxes, desks, or work surfaces, and storage for each assistant when
possible, based on the needs of the department or unit.
C. The University shall exercise due diligence to protect the confidentiality of assistants
when communicating matters pertaining to employment.
14

D. Any materials, including grade books, instructional materials, textbooks, software,
hardware, equipment, and supplies required by the University for all job- related tasks
performed by the assistant will be provided at no cost to the assistant.
E. The supplies and office equipment, including photocopiers, typewriters, computers,
printers, etc. of the department or unit shall be made available without cost to the
assistant to the extent required by the University.
F. The University shall make a good faith effort to make accommodation for
international assistants experiencing difficulties acquiring the documentation necessary
for employment.
G. Assistants are entitled to use legal services that may be available to students. To the
extent that assistants are performing employment duties, they are provided legal coverage
as University employees as set forth under The University of Illinois Liability Self-
Insurance Plan.
H. The University is committed to upholding all applicable academic standards and
academic and disciplinary codes of conduct. Teaching assistants will have access to
available University resources including software necessary for upholding those
standards and codes, subject to the approval of the University.
I. Assistants covered by this Agreement shall be eligible to enroll a child dependent or
dependents in the UIC Children’s Center and/or any other current and future providers of
child-care established by the University. For the duration of this Agreement, the cost of
an assistant to enroll a child dependent or dependents in the UIC Children’s Center shall
be determined according to an income-based sliding scale.
J. Assistants shall have inter-library loan privileges in accordance with normal library
procedures through the circulation desk. Upon request, assistants may borrow and reserve
materials needed for their courses through the end of the semester.
K. If recording is a required component of an assistant’s assignment (except when
required for student accommodations), the requirement will be communicated in writing
to the employee when the assignment is given. The assistant may request but cannot be
guaranteed an assignment which does not require recording. University recordings
related to a course made during a semester shall only be made accessible to participants
in that course and utilized during the semester it is recorded.
XI.Union Rights
A. The University shall notify all new assistants hired to work in the categories
covered by this Agreement that the Union is the exclusive representative for all assistants
described in Article II. The University shall further notify assistants of the web address
at which the current Agreement may be found.
15

B. The University will make available to the Union the name and address, university
email address, department(s) of enrollment, job classification(s), University ID number
(UIN), appointing department(s), percentage of assistantship(s), and wages in electronic
format ten (10) business days before the first pay period in the Fall Semester and five (5)
business days after each other pay period, or as soon as practicable, for all new
appointments in the classifications covered by this Agreement.
C. The Union will be notified at least two (2) weeks in advance of all campus-wide and
college scheduled orientations for graduate students, TAs and GAs. The Union will be
placed on the agenda and given fifteen (15) minutes at such orientations, unless the
Union otherwise notifies the University. Upon request, and by mutual agreement, the
Union will be placed on the agenda and given fifteen (15) minutes at the end of scheduled
Unit and Department orientations. Any Department or Unit that employs ten (10) or more
TAs, GAs or any combination thereof may not deny the Union's request to speak at their
orientation. For the purposes of this Article, an orientation shall be defined as events
satisfying any of the following criteria:
1.Any event called an orientation or onboarding event;
2.Any event that is mandatory and addressing job duties of first time graduate
students and/or graduate assistants.
D.The Union shall have the right to access for the purpose of distribution of Union
literature all visual and electronic communication methods available to non-University
entities including labor unions under University policy as it may exist or evolve. Also, the
Union may have posted certain notices and bulletins upon bulletin boards designated by
the University. These notices and bulletins will be on the official letterhead of the Union,
bearing the name of an officer thereof. Notices and bulletins permitted to be posted are:
1.Notice of Union meetings;
2.Notices of Union elections;
3.Notice of Union appointments and results of Union elections; and
any others which the University may approve from time to time. The number of copies
which the Union wishes to have posted, plus one (1) will be filed with the University's
Labor Relations Office.
E. The University shall provide the Union with all requested information for negotiating
and enforcing the Agreement in a timely manner, as required by law.
F. Upon request of the Union, units that employ teaching and graduate assistants shall
provide a list of names, email addresses and office locations, and when available,
scheduled office hour times and locations of the TAs and GAs employed in that unit.
16

XII.Wages
A. The minimum wage level for a 50% FTE, 9-month appointment, and the increase for
continuing assistants shall be as follows:
Academic Year Minimum Wages Continuing Assistant
Increase
Fall 2022 to Summer $22,590 The percentage increase
2023 determined on the Chicago
campus to be the general
wage increase for AY
Fall 2023 to Summer $23,440 22/23, AY 23/24 and AY
2024 24/25 but not less than the
minimum.
Fall 2024 to Summer $24,200
2025
B. For GAs whose appointment requires them to live in a residence hall, room and board
shall not be used to determine the amount of the wages and increases provided by this
Article.
C. Appointments of different duration or percentage shall be figured proportionally.
Units that currently appoint assistants on a nine (9) month basis shall continue to do so
for assistants currently employed under those terms, unless advance notice is provided in
the letter of offer that the appointment term has changed. The parties agree that the
assistant’s appointing unit may pay above the minimum wage and minimum percent
increment for continuing assistant appointments, and that this amount may vary from unit
to unit.
D. All assistants covered by this Agreement shall be paid on or before the 16th of each
month they are employed, or as soon thereafter as is practicable. The University shall not
require assistants to pay late payment fees that have been assessed as a result of an
appointment being processed late by the University. However, the University will only
waive late payment fees associated with the semester that the appointment is processed
late. Any late payment fees assessed after the appointment has been processed will not be
waived.
XIII.Health Care
A. All assistants covered by this Agreement shall receive health care benefits as
described below. A copy of the Notice of Appointment, as described by Article III of this
17

Agreement, shall suffice to establish proof of employment for purposes of accessing any
of the benefits below when necessary.
B. Health Service Fee
Assistants shall have full access to all health services provided to students such as may be
provided by the Family Medicine Center, the Counseling Center, the Wellness Center and
Pharmacy Services. For academic year Fall 2022 through Summer 2023, academic year
Fall 2023 through Summer 2024, and academic year Fall 2024 through Summer 2025,
the University shall pay 100% of the student health service fee for each assistant covered
under this Agreement. The fee will only be waived for the assistant in the semester(s) or
summer term the assistant has an appointment.
C. Health Insurance
Assistants are eligible for coverage under CampusCare or other current or future health
insurance plans available to students. Assistants must obtain the student health insurance
or document that they have other health insurance coverage equivalent to the University
plan.
1. For academic year Fall 2022 through Summer 2023, the bargaining unit member
shall contribute $260 of the cost of coverage for each Fall and Spring semester for
each assistant covered under this Agreement who chooses to be covered by the
University plan.
2. For academic year Fall 2023 through Summer 2024, the bargaining unit member
shall contribute $270 of the cost of coverage for each Fall and Spring semester for
each assistant covered under this Agreement who chooses to be covered by the
University plan.
3. For academic year Fall 2024 through Summer 2025, the bargaining unit member
shall contribute $280 of the cost of coverage for each Fall and Spring semester for
each assistant covered under this Agreement who chooses to be covered by the
University plan.
For AY 22/23, AY 23/24 and AY 24/25 for each assistant covered under this Agreement,
the University shall pay 25% of the cost of coverage for each of the assistant’s
dependents (spouse and/or child) who choose to be covered under the University plan.
D. Vision Insurance
For academic year Fall 2022 through Summer 2023, academic year Fall 2023 through
Summer 2024, and academic year Fall 2024 through Summer 2025, costs of the vision
program will be borne by the University and will be paid in accordance with the
program’s provisions.
18

E. Dental Insurance
For academic year Fall 2022 through Summer 2023, academic year Fall 2023 through
Summer 2024, and academic year Fall 2024 through Summer 2025, costs of the dental
program will be borne by the University and will be paid in accordance with the
program’s provisions. Benefits shall be as provided by the program’s certificate of
coverage or similar document.
F. During the term of this Agreement, the University has the sole discretion to alter the
terms of health coverage including but not limited to coverage, carriers, cost to assistants,
services, availability, accessibility, or other program provisions so long as such alteration
does not conflict with a provision of this Agreement. Any disputes concerning the
University’s contributions under the healthcare benefits provided above shall be subject
to the Grievance Procedure article of this Agreement.
G. The Union shall designate two (2) representatives to meet with two (2) University
officials responsible for CampusCare three (3) times per year upon request of the Union,
for the purpose of providing input and recommendations to the University with respect to
the University’s student health insurance program. The Union and the University are
committed to working to improve health care benefits available to assistants.
XIV. Expenses
A. Travel
When assistants are required by their appointing units to travel in relation to their TA or
GA duties, the University will reimburse the assistants for such travel. The University’s
Business and Financial Policies and Procedures provide complete guidelines for these
reimbursements. Travel for University-related business should be conducted as
economically as possible within the assistant’s constraints of time and convenience.
B. Laboratory Equipment
Assistants shall not be expected to pay for laboratory equipment necessary for the
fulfillment of work-related duties. Nor shall assistants be expected to pay for laboratory
equipment that is broken or damaged in the execution of approved or authorized work-
related duties.
C. Immunizations and Certifications
If a department determines that an immunization or certification is required for an
assistant to perform the functions of an appointment, the department shall pay for such
immunization or certification. Nothing in this section is intended to apply to any
immunization or certification required for immigration purposes, as part of the
admissions process, or to obtain a professional license.
19

XV.Leaves and Holidays
A. Vacation
Assistantships typically require services on a 9-month or semester-by-semester basis (“E”
service), and some assistants will have separate summer appointments for part or all of
the summer. Assistants on a 9-month or semester-by-semester basis do not earn any
vacation. Assistants who are appointed on a 12-month basis (“Y” service) are eligible for
vacations of 24 workdays each year at the percentage they are appointed, based on two
days of vacation for each month of service to a maximum accumulation of 48 workdays
at the percentage of their appointment. The scheduling of vacation time is determined
with the supervisor and may include time taken during the semester breaks, at the
discretion of the employing department.
B. Sick Leave
1. Assistants covered under this bargaining agreement are eligible for five (5) paid
workdays of sick leave per Fall and Spring semester. Unused sick days expire at
the end of the Fall or Spring semester (i.e., there is no carryover) and assistants
will not be paid out for unused sick days. Assistants are required to report sick
leave in accordance with the employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s
employing unit will track the assistant’s sick leave.
2. Assistants must notify, as promptly as possible, the department head or supervisor
so that arrangements for coverage of duties can be made and the usage recorded.
Assistants may use sick leave for illness of, injury to, or need to obtain medical or
dental consultation for the assistant, assistant’s spouse or registered domestic
partner under the terms of University policy or the Illinois Religious Freedom
Protection and Civil Union Act, including their children, or parents and members
of the assistant's household. Sick leave may also be used for pregnancy or
following the birth or adoption of a child to care for that child. The department
head or supervisor shall not discourage the assistant from using sick leave. Sick
leave will not be denied in an arbitrary or capricious manner.
C. Parental Leave
Eligible assistants are entitled to up to six (6) weeks of parental leave without loss of pay
immediately following the birth of a child, or upon either the initial placement or the
legal adoption of a child under 18 years of age. Eligible assistants are those who hold an
active appointment at the time the parental leave is taken. Parental leave will be counted
as part of the twelve-week entitlement accorded by the Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993 (FMLA) for FMLA-eligible individuals and may be used in conjunction with other
paid or unpaid leaves for which the individual is eligible. Assistants may request
additional unpaid time in accordance with Personal Leave, Section H of this Article. Such
request will not be denied in an arbitrary or capricious manner. If this request is denied in
an arbitrary or capricious manner, the Union may file a grievance at Level 3 of the
20

Grievance Procedure (Article XXII, Section E (3)). Assistants are required to report
parental leave in accordance with the employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s
employing unit will track the assistant’s parental leave.
D. Jury Duty
1. Assistants are eligible for leave of absence without loss of pay for the duration of
jury duty, on the day or days when the assistants would have otherwise been
performing assistant duties. An assistant may also retain funds paid in
compensation for jury duty in keeping with University policy, which is subject to
change.
2. An assistant summoned as a juror shall immediately inform their supervisor of the
absence. Teaching assistants who are called for jury duty shall discuss with their
supervisor whether jury service will conflict with their teaching obligation and if
so, whether requesting a deferral from jury duty is appropriate. An assistant who
reports for jury duty and is dismissed shall resume their normal duties as soon as
possible. Assistants are required to report jury duty in accordance with the
employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s employing unit will track the
assistant’s jury duty.
E. Military Leave
Military leave shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal law, and
University policy. Assistants are required to report military leave in accordance with the
employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s employing unit will track the assistant’s
military leave.
F. Bereavement Leave
Assistants are eligible to receive paid leave to attend the funeral, for travel, and
bereavement time upon the death of an immediate family member in the amount of five
(5)days or one (1) day for other relations in accordance with the policy at
https://www.hr.uillinois.edu/leave/funeral. For the purposes of this Article, gendered
terms covered in the policy are understood to include equivalent familial relationships
regardless of gender. This Article shall not preclude assistants from requesting to use
accrued or unpaid leave. Assistants are required to report bereavement leave in
accordance with the employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s employing unit will
track the assistant’s bereavement leave.
G. Coverage Responsibility
If an assistant must be absent from work, it is the assistant’s responsibility to inform the
assistant’s supervisor in advance as promptly as possible of the absence, to explain to the
supervisor the reason for the absence, to secure the supervisor’s approval of the absence,
so that arrangements for the absence can be made by the assistant’s supervisor and so that
21

usage of leave may be recorded. In no case will the assistant be required to secure or pay
for a temporary replacement.
H. Personal Leave of Absence
An assistant may be granted an unpaid leave of absence during the term of their
appointment, upon request to and at the sole discretion of the University and subject to
such terms and conditions as the University may establish.
I. Holidays
Assistants shall receive holidays off without loss of pay in accordance with the campus
holiday schedule, which may be modified from time-to-time. With advance notice to their
supervisor, an assistant who wishes to observe a religious holiday shall receive such
reasonable accommodation as an adjustment of scheduled work hours to attend services
in accordance with the State of Illinois Religious Observances Act.
J. Family Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA)
In compliance with the FMLA and applicable rules and regulations, the University may
adopt policies to implement the FMLA that are in accord with what is legally permissible
under the Act and the applicable rules and regulations.
K. Professional and Conference Leave
Departments may allow and approve assistants paid leave to attend professional
conferences. Approval shall not be denied in an arbitrary or capricious manner.
L. Personal Day
Assistants are eligible for one (1) paid work day each semester to attend to personal
business. The unused personal day expires at the end of the appointment and assistants
will not be paid for the unused personal day. Scheduling of personal day use requires
prompt notification to, and approval by, the department head or supervisor, and may
include time taken during the semester breaks. The department head or supervisor shall
not discourage the assistant from using the personal day. Approval of personal days shall
not be withheld arbitrarily or capriciously. Assistants are required to report the personal
day in accordance with the employing unit’s instruction. Each assistant’s employing unit
will track the assistant’s personal day.
XVI.Dues Deduction
A. Upon receipt of written authorization from the Union, the University shall deduct the
amount of Union dues certified by the Union and any authorized increase therein, and
shall remit to the Union at the address designated by the Union. The Union may elect to
have the University remit dues by direct deposit to an account designated by the Union,
22

as close as is practicable to the 16th of each month. Upon request by the Union, the
University will provide login access via an ID and password to retrieve a list that can be
formatted into an excel spreadsheet of all assistants from whose pay dues have been
deducted each pay period. The University will provide login access to, and will also
provide training in, the electronic format upon the Union's request. The Union shall
notify the University of any increase in dues at least 30 calendar days before the effective
date of the increase.
1. The University will acknowledge receipt of new dues deduction authorization
within seventeen (17) calendar days of receipt by University Payroll and Benefits
(UPB).
2. To provide sufficient time for UPB to process dues deduction authorization, such
authorization must be submitted at least seven (7) business days prior to the pay
calculation processing date, i.e., the date on which UPB begins the payroll
calculation process for University employees who are being paid on a monthly
basis.
3. The University shall make available to the Union a list of all payroll calculation
dates as provided on https://www.obfs.uillinois.edu/payroll/schedules/, as soon as
practicable each year.
B. Hold Harmless Provision
In the event of any legal action against the University brought in a court or administrative
agency because of its compliance with this Article, the Union agrees to defend such
action, at its own expense and through its own counsel, provided:
• The University notifies the Union promptly, in writing, and permits the Union to
intervene as a party if it so desires; and
• The University gives full and complete cooperation to the Union and its counsel
in securing and giving evidence, obtaining witnesses and making relevant
information available at both trial and all appellate levels.
1. The Union shall indemnify and hold harmless the University, its members,
officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands,
actions, complaints, suits, or other forms of liability that shall arise out of, or by
reason of, action taken by the University for the purposes of complying with the
above provisions of this Article, or in reliance on any list, notice, certification,
affidavit, or assignment furnished under any of such provisions.
2. It is expressly understood that this hold harmless provision will not apply to any
claim, demand, suit, or other form of liability which may arise as a result of
willful misconduct by the University.
23

XVII.TA/GA Work Rules
TAs and GAs shall comply with all work rules and expectations which are developed by,
in their appointing departments, as well as applicable University rules and policies.
Assistants must complete online training including, but not limited to, Annual Preventing
Harassment and Discrimination Training, and Ethics Training by the deadline set by the
University. In performance of their University duties, all TAs and GAs will conduct
themselves in a manner that is professional, courteous and conducive to a professional
atmosphere in their class/laboratory or other areas.
XVIII. Access to Personnel File
A. There shall be only one official personnel file for each assistant, and it shall be
maintained by the University’s Human Resources Office(s). The file shall contain only
information related to each assistant’s employment and shall not include materials related
to the assistant’s academic performance. Each assistant shall be notified in writing by the
University whenever disciplinary and/or evaluative material is added to the personnel
file. Assistants shall have the right to add explanatory material to their official personnel
file, as allowed by law.
B. The assistant’s signature on disciplinary or evaluative material confirms only
discussion or receipt of these documents but indicates neither agreement nor
disagreement. Records relating to the grievance process, such as appeals, responses, and
settlement documents, shall not be maintained in the personnel file.
C. Each assistant shall be permitted to review the official personnel file according to the
Personnel Record Review Act (820 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). Assistants may request to review
their file up to two (2) times per calendar year. If authorized by an assistant in writing,
the Union may also review the file. Requests by assistants or their designated
representative for copies of personnel files will be honored at a cost not to exceed the
actual cost of duplication.
D. The University shall not gather or keep a record of non-academic or non-
employment-related activities or information, including an assistant’s associations,
political activities, publications, or communications, except as provided by 820 ILCS
40/1 et seq.
XIX. Health and Safety
A. The University is committed to the safety and well being of its students, staff, and the
public it serves. The administration, faculty, and staff have the responsibility to promote
health and safety in their environment and operations and shall do so in accordance with
any and all applicable federal and state laws. Assistants shall report any unhealthy or
hazardous work conditions and the University shall review the situation and attempt to
resolve the matter. An assistant may refuse to work in hazardous work conditions as
allowed by law.
24

B. The University shall make a good faith effort to schedule evening courses taught by
assistants in buildings with other activity so as to ensure the safety of those assistants and
their students. Health and Safety issues shall be raised and discussed during labor-
management meetings and may include participation from campus police or other
relevant campus environmental safety and health personnel.
C. If a work site is closed for health and safety reasons, affected assistants shall continue
to receive their full tuition and fee waivers and wages for the remainder of the
appointment period. If the University provides appropriate alternate space, affected
assistants will be expected to carry out their duties in that space.
D. The University shall pay the cost of, supply, and maintain all safety items, such as
tools, equipment, and protective clothing, including respiratory equipment and eyewear
that the University requires the assistants to use in the performance of their duties. The
University shall supply and maintain adequate emergency facilities, equipment and
supplies including, but not limited to, eyewash stations and emergency shower stations.
These shall be available at appropriate locations within easy and timely access and shall
be provided at no cost to assistants. The University shall pay the cost of and provide
proper training and supervision to ensure that assistants operate machinery, tools and
equipment with safety and care when the University requires the assistants to use such
items in the performance of their duties.
E. If an assistant is injured in a work-related incident and is unable to continue their
employment duties, the assistant’s tuition waiver will continue for the remainder of the
appointment term.
F. The University will comply with all applicable federal and state laws regarding
asbestos and toxic materials and University policies and regulations regarding
employment accommodations and health and safety.
G. Training related to health and safety provided by the Environmental Health and
Safety Office shall be available to assistants covered by this Agreement. Assistants shall
not be expected to pay for training if it is deemed necessary by the unit to fulfill the
requirements of their position and is pre-approved by the unit in writing.
H. The University will provide relevant information concerning health and safety matters
affecting bargaining unit members, upon request, as required by law and, when possible,
within twenty (20) business days.
XX.Labor–Management Meetings and Consultation
A. Labor-Management Meetings
It is the joint intention of the Union and the University to meet on a regular basis to
promote a sound and mutually beneficial relationship. The University and the Union shall
each designate two members (Co-chairs) to meet.
25

B. Meetings
The Union and the University shall meet each semester during the term of this Agreement
when requested by the Union. The Co-chairs shall work together to schedule mutually
agreeable meeting times and locations and to specify an agenda. Discussion topics may
include, but are not limited to, changes in payroll, administration or benefits that concern
or affect the monetary and non-monetary compensation of assistants. Additional meetings
may be called by mutual agreement. Any resolution or agreements made as a result of
these meetings shall be reduced to writing and signed by the parties.
XXI. Discipline and Dismissal
A. The University agrees with the principle of positive progressive discipline intended to
correct the assistant’s deficiencies, when possible. Prior to initiating the progressive
disciplinary process, supervisors shall have an informal discussion with the assistant to
correct the assistant’s deficiencies. Informal discussions shall be issued in a confidential
manner so as not to cause embarrassment to the assistant. A note that the discussion was
held will be maintained by the supervisor. A copy of the note that this informal
discussion was held will be provided to the assistant and will not be included in the
assistant’s personnel file.
B. Positive progressive discipline may occur in the following manner:
1. If the supervisor’s attempt to correct the assistant’s deficiencies through an
informal discussion is unsuccessful, the first step in the progressive disciplinary
process shall be a pre-disciplinary meeting. The assistant shall be notified at least
two (2) days in advance in writing of the purpose of the meeting and the possible
imposition of discipline. At the pre-disciplinary meeting, the assistant shall be
given the opportunity to rebut the alleged deficiencies.
2. After the pre-disciplinary meeting, the supervisor will issue in writing the
outcome of the pre-disciplinary meeting. If discipline is issued, disciplinary action
may include but is not limited to: a written reprimand, reduction of appointment
duties, reassignment, or suspension of appointment. The document will be placed
in the assistant’s personnel file. The assistant shall be given the opportunity to
submit a written statement refuting the reason for discipline that shall be included
in the file in accordance with HR Policy 1301. A written disciplinary action that is
one (1) or more years old shall not be used for the purpose of pyramiding
penalties for like offenses.
Discipline shall be issued in a confidential manner so as not to cause
embarrassment to the assistant.
C. Discipline up to dismissal may result from progressive discipline or from a single
serious infraction. The parties acknowledge that disciplinary action might not be
progressive if the offense is sufficiently serious.
26

D. Dismissal will be for just cause. Causes justifying dismissal for a serious infraction
shall include but are not limited to the following reasons: failing to attend mandatory
orientation or other mandatory sessions; engaging in misconduct in the performance of
University duties; insubordination (refusing to perform duties when specifically
directed); violating University regulations or policies, including policies related to
discrimination and harassment; acting outside the appropriate exercise of University
responsibilities so as to willfully physically harm, threaten physical harm to, harass, or
intimidate a visitor or a member of the University community; and damaging, destroying,
or misappropriating property owned by the University or any property used in connection
with a University function or approved activity.
E. Anonymous documents shall not be used to justify disciplinary action unless
the University reasonably deems it necessary.
F. Assistants have the right to Union representation throughout the entire disciplinary
process and during any investigatory interviews that may reasonably lead to disciplinary
action. An assistant may appeal disciplinary action, including dismissals, according to
the grievance procedure outlined in Article XXII of this Agreement. Any award of back
pay shall not exceed an amount the assistant would have earned from the date of
suspension, reduction in appointment, or dismissal to the end of the term of appointment.
XXII. Grievance Procedure
A. Grievance Definition
A grievance is a complaint filed by an assistant, group of assistants, or the Union alleging
a violation by the University of a specific provision of this Agreement.
B. Notification of Union Officials
The Union shall furnish the University with a full list of elected officials and elected
officers, including grievance officer, as soon as they become available, but not later than
October 1 of each academic year. The Union shall also inform the University in writing
of any changes to the list of elected officials and elected officers, including grievance
officer, as changes take place.
C. Basic Principles
1. Every assistant covered by this Agreement or group of such assistants, or the
Union shall have the right to present grievances in accordance with these
procedures. Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this Agreement shall
be construed to prevent any individual assistant from discussing a problem with
the administration and having it adjusted with the representation of the Union.
However, any individual assistant covered by this Agreement or group of such
assistants may present grievances to the University and have them adjusted
without the representation of the Union as long as the adjustment is not
27

inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement and provided that the Union has
been given an opportunity to be present at such adjustment.
2. If practicable, an effort shall first be made to adjust an alleged grievance
informally between the assistant (and their Union representative, if so desired)
and the immediate supervisor. If further discussion is necessary, a request may be
made, per Section D of this Article, for a time extension to continue efforts
towards reaching an informal resolution. Filing a written grievance by the
deadline specified in this Article does not preclude the parties from continuing to
informally attempt to resolve the matter.
3. An assistant who participates in the grievance procedure shall not be subject to
discipline or reprisal because of such participation.
4. Meetings, conferences and hearings under this procedure shall be conducted at a
time and place that will afford a fair and reasonable opportunity for necessary
persons, including witnesses, to attend.
5. All records of grievances will be kept separate from the official personnel file
maintained by the University’s Human Resource Office(s).
6. The Union may file a grievance at Level 3 of the Grievance Procedure (described
below in Section E (3)) if the grievance affects more than one assistant and/or is
common to assistants employed in more than one department covered under this
Agreement or if the grievance is of an issue whereby the supervisor and/or Unit
Executive Officer (UEO) do not have authority to resolve the grievance, or in a
case involving dismissal of an assistant during the appointment period.
D. Time Limits
Failure to file a grievance within thirty (30) business days from the date when the first
events or pattern of events on which the grievance is based should reasonably have been
discovered, shall constitute a waiver of the grievance. Failure to appeal a grievance from
one level to another within the time periods hereafter provided shall constitute a waiver
of the grievance. If the University fails to respond to a grievance within the applicable
time limit, the grievant may appeal the grievance to the next level. Written requests by
either party for an extension of any and all time limits as provided in the Article shall not
be unreasonably denied.
The phrase “business days” for purposes of this Article shall mean Monday through
Friday, excluding campus-designated holidays.
E. Grievance Procedure
Level One
28

The grievant shall have thirty (30) business days from the date when the first events or
pattern of events on which the grievance is based should reasonably have been
discovered, to file a written grievance with the assistant’s UEO. The written grievance
should contain the following information: a specific description of the dispute, the facts
giving rise to the dispute, a listing of the article and section violated, a statement as to
how the article and section were violated, the date(s) of the violation, and requested
remedy. Within 10 business days, the UEO or designee shall confirm receipt of the
grievance and will schedule a time to meet as soon as practical with the grievant(s) and
their Union representative (if so desired). Following the Level 1 grievance meeting, the
UEO or designee shall give a written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the
Union within ten (10) business days of the meeting. If the Union and Employer (the
parties) both agree in writing, the parties may elect not to have a meeting, and the UEO
or designee shall give a written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the Union
within ten (10) business days of the decision to not hold a meeting.
Level Two
In the event the grievance is not resolved at Level 1, the decision rendered may be
appealed to the Dean of the College in which the assistant is appointed (or Executive
Officer to whom the UEO reports), provided such appeal is made in writing within ten
(10)business days after receipt of the decision at Level 1. If a grievance has been
appealed, within 10 business days, the Dean or designee shall confirm receipt of the
grievance and will schedule a time to meet as soon as practical with the grievant(s) and
their Union representative (if so desired). Following the Level 2 grievance meeting, the
UEO or designee shall give a written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the
Union within ten (10) business days of the meeting. If the Union and Employer (the
parties) both agree in writing, the parties may elect not to have a meeting, and the Dean
or designee shall give a written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the Union
within ten (10) business days of the decision to not hold a meeting.
Level Three
In the event the grievance is not resolved at Level 2, the decision may be appealed to the
Office of the Chancellor or designee in Campus Human Resources, provided such appeal
is made in writing within ten (10) business days after receipt of the decision at Level 2. If
a grievance has been appealed to Level 3, as described above, within 10 business days,
the Chancellor or designee shall confirm receipt of the grievance and will schedule a time
to meet as soon as practical with the grievant(s) and their Union representative (if so
desired). Following the Level 3 grievance meeting, the Chancellor or designee shall give
a written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the Union within ten (10) business
days of the meeting. If the Union and Employer (the parties) both agree in writing, the
parties may elect not to have a meeting, and the Chancellor or designee shall give a
written decision on the grievance to the grievant and the Union within ten (10) business
days of the decision to not hold a meeting.
29

F. Arbitration Procedure
1. Request. The Union may submit a grievance to arbitration, provided written
notice of intent to arbitrate is delivered to the office of the Associate/Assistant
Provost within twenty (20) business days following receipt of the decision at
Level 3 of the grievance procedure. More than one grievance may be submitted to
the same arbitrator if both parties so agree in writing.
2. Selection of Arbitrator. Upon submission of a request for arbitration, the parties
may attempt to agree upon an arbitrator. If a dismissal grievance is pursued to
arbitration, the parties agree to select an arbitrator who shall hear the case within
twenty (20) business days after the submission of the request for arbitration, if
practicable. In the event the parties are unable to agree upon the arbitrator within
ten (10) business days after the request to arbitrate, the parties shall jointly request
the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services (FMCS) to submit a panel of five
(5)arbitrators, all of whom are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators.
Each party retains the right to reject one panel in its entirety and request that a
new panel be submitted. Both the University and the Union shall have the right to
strike a total of two (2) names from the panel with the party that strikes first
decided by a coin toss or equivalent random process. The parties then shall
alternately strike the remaining arbitrators on the panel, one at a time, until only
one arbitrator remains. The person remaining shall be the arbitrator. The parties
shall promptly notify the remaining arbitrator of their selection.
3. Hearing. The grievance shall be heard by a single arbitrator and both parties may
be represented by such persons as they may designate, and the parties shall have
the right to a hearing at which time both parties will have the opportunity to
submit evidence, offer testimony, and make oral or written arguments relating to
the issues before the arbitrator.
4. Decision. The arbitrator so selected shall confer with the University and Union
representatives and hold hearings promptly and shall issue their decision not later
than twenty (20) business days from the date of the close of the hearings or, if
written briefs have not been waived, then from the date the final statements and
proofs on the issues are submitted to the arbitrator. The arbitrator’s decision shall
be in writing and shall set forth their findings of fact, reasoning, and conclusions
on the issues submitted. The arbitrator’s authority shall be limited to determining
whether the University has violated arbitrable provisions of this contract. The
arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction or authority to add to, amend, modify, nullify,
or ignore in any way the provisions of this contract nor shall the arbitrator have
the authority to review any academic judgment. To the extent that the
University’s action is based upon academic judgment, the arbitrator shall have no
authority or jurisdiction to substitute their judgment for that of the University and
its agents. In the event that a dismissal grievance is pursued to arbitration and the
arbitrator does not find for the University, the arbitrator may make a finding of
fact and award back pay, including tuition and fee service waiver, but not
30

reinstatement, unless the decision can be rendered during the initial term of the
appointment. The decision of the arbitrator shall be submitted to the parties and, if
it is rendered in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be final and
binding on the parties.
5. Expenses. The cost for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses,
if any, and actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses shall be borne
equally by the University and the Union. Any other expenses incurred shall be
paid by the party incurring the same.
XXIII. Electronic Availability of the Agreement
Within thirty (30) days of ratification the University shall post this Agreement to its
website. The University shall maintain this Agreement on its website for the duration of
the Agreement.
XXIV.No Strike/No Lockout
There shall be no strike during the term of this Agreement. Neither the Union, through its
officials, nor any assistant covered by this Agreement shall cause, instigate, participate in,
support, encourage, or condone any strike, slowdown, or sympathy strike. Assistants who
violate this Article may be subject to disciplinary action under the terms of this
Agreement. In consideration of this "no strike pledge", no lockout of employees shall be
instituted by the University during the term of this Agreement; provided however, this
Article should not be construed as requiring the University to stay in continuous
operation.
XXV. Savings
Should any part of this Agreement or any provision(s) contained herein be determined to
be illegal or invalid by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction or if compliance with
or enforcement of any provision should be restrained by such court or agency pending a
final determination as to its validity, such part or provision(s) shall not invalidate the
remaining portions hereof and they shall remain in full force and effect. If either party
makes a request, the invalidated part(s) or provision(s) will be renegotiated.
XXVI. Entire Agreement
A. The parties agree that this Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the
parties concerning any subject covered herein; however, the parties may at any time
amend this Agreement in writing by mutual consent, as noted below. The University and
the Union acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this Agreement
each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect
to any subject or matter not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining, and
that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that
right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. Therefore, the University and
31

Union, for the term of this Agreement, each voluntarily waives the right, and agrees that
the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with respect to any subject referred
to or covered in this Agreement.
B. This Agreement represents the entire agreement between the University and the
Union. Any agreement(s) which supplement this Agreement shall not be binding or
effective for any purpose whatsoever unless reduced to writing and signed by the
University and the Union.
C. No past practice, course of conduct, or understanding prior to the date of ratification
which varies, waives, or modifies any of the express terms or conditions contained herein
shall be binding upon the parties.
XXVII.Duration
This Agreement shall become effective on August 16, 2022 and shall remain in effect
until August 15, 2025. This Agreement shall automatically be renewed thereafter from
year to year unless either party provides notice to the other in writing at least sixty (60)
days prior to its expiration date of a desire to modify the Agreement. Negotiations for a
successor agreement shall commence upon written notice and continue thereafter in
accordance with the IELRA.
32

WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have hereunto affixed
their hands on this
- ---=2=9- -clay of-A'-"p'"ri'."l -----2011_
Local 6297 Graduate Employees' THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
Organization UNIVER5ITY OF ILLINOIS
iJvi!L?~~~
By /Jad~
GEO 6297 - Bargaining Chair Comptroller
Approved:~ · ,I)~
Associate ePresident for Administration
and Human Resources
T/umuwR.. ~' 1r. KR.R.
Executive Director ofL abor and Employee
Relations and Special CoWlSel
Senior Associate Director of Labor :and
Employee Relations and ChiefNegotiator
Approved as to Legal Form:
Ma,f/J,w.,,r c;. 04-29-2022
J~
For University CoW1Sel (Date)
33

SIDE LETTER (9-MONTH APPOINTMENTS)
TO THE 2022 – 2025 AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS BOARD OF TRUSTEES
AND THE GRADUATE EMPLOYEES’ ORGANIZATION LOCAL 6297
Side Letter: 9-Month Appointments
The University and Union agree to create a task force, which will include an equal
number of representatives from the Union and the University, to explore the feasibility of
expanding 9-month appointments. The taskforce shall, by consensus, draft
recommendations to the Provost. Recommendations shall be delivered to the Provost by
the end of Spring 2023. The University reserves the right to determine the availability of
9-month appointments.
~~
ortheUnion
For the University ,<-.,;.~ ,e ~6"""' '-1/2.?/=
(Date)
34

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS BOARD OF TRUSTEES
AND THE GRADUATE EMPLOYEES’ ORGANIZATION LOCAL 6297
1. For the period Fall 2021 through Spring 2022, the minimum wage level for a
50% FTE, 9-month appointment shall be $20,615.
2. For the period Summer 2022, the minimum wage level for a 50% FTE, 9-month
appointment shall be $22,590.
3. *One-time payment of $2000 to those assistants on the University payroll as of
May 1, 2022, and who were in the bargaining unit for Fall 2021 and Spring
2022; or a
4. *One-time payment of $1000 to those assistants on the University payroll as of
May 1, 2022, and who were in the bargaining unit for only Spring 2022.
5. For grievances filed during the period August 16, 2021 through August 15,
2022, the University and Union shall follow the grievance and arbitration
procedures outlined in the 2018-2021 GEO CBA.
* The University agrees to implement the terms of the Memorandum of
Understanding regarding one-time payments to assistants in the bargaining unit so long as
the parties have executed Tentative Agreements on all the remaining issues currently in
this proposal by Monday April 25, 2022, 11:59 p.m. and GEO has communicated to UIC
via email that GEO has ratified the Agreement no later than 9:00 a.m. (CST) on Friday,
April 29, 2022.
Notwithstanding this MOU all terms and conditions of this Agreement and MOU must be
ratified by GEO and fully executed by both parties.
~,.Jl l '<?'I ?..,Ji, "L
or the Union
(Date)
~/2$/U­
(Dat,e)
35

