AGREEMENT
by and between
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
ILLINOIS
and
THE COMMITTEE OF INTERNS AND RESIDENTS/SEIU (CIR),
Local 1957
Effective from July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2026, this
Agreement made and entered into by and between The Board of
Trustees of the University of Illinois (“University”) and the
Committee of Interns and Residents/SEIU (CIR) Local 1957
(“Union”).
1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Recognition and Interpretation 3
Article II Access 5
Article III Ancillary Staffing 7
Article IV Inclusivity and Non-Discrimination 8
Article V Employee List and Orientation 9
Article VI Employee Health, Safety and Security 10
Article VII Labor Management Meetings 11
Article VIII Lactation Accommodation 11
Article IX Liability/Malpractice Insurance 11
Article X Management Rights 12
Article XI Leaves 13
Article XII Release Time 16
Article XIII Resident Lounges and Call Rooms 16
Article XIV Resident Wellbeing 17
Article XV Child Care 17
Article XVI Grievance and Arbitration 18
Article XVII Health Benefits 21
Article XVIII Holidays 22
Article XIX Vacations 23
Article XX License Reimbursement & Training 24
Article XXI Electronic Devices 25
Article XXII Educational Expense Fund and Scholarly Pursuit 26
Article XXIII Educational Time 27
Article XXIV Meal Allowance 27
Article XXV Transportation and Fatigue Mitigation 27
Article XXVI Retirement Plans 28
Article XXVII Program Closure/Reduction 28
Article XXVIII Moonlighting 29
Article XXIX Uniforms 29
Article XXX Dues Deduction 30
Article XXXI Miscellaneous Legal Provisions 31
Article XXXII No Strikes, No Lockouts 32
Article XXXIII Salaries 32
Article XXXIV Duration 33
Appendix A Salary Chart 35
2

Article I
Recognition and Interpretation
1.01 Recognition
A. The University recognizes the Union as the exclusive representative for a single
negotiation unit as certified by the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Board in
Case No. 2021-RC-0015-C for matters within the scope of representation as
specified in the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act and consisting of
employees in the following classes and described as follows:
Included:
All Residents and Fellows employed by the Board of Trustees of the University of
Illinois who have executed a Resident Agreement that governs their participation
in the University College of Medicine’s Graduate Medical Education Program.
Excluded:
All Residents and Fellows whose Resident agreement reflects a primary training
work site outside the Chicago, Illinois metropolitan area; and/or
All Residents and Fellows whose Resident agreement governs participation in
another College graduate education program besides the College of Medicine;
and/or
All Residents and Fellows who arc sponsored through the Saudi Arabian Cultural
Mission to the United States; and/or
All Residents and Fellows who devote at least 50% of their University
employment to research pursuant to government or private grants, for which the
University receives a partial or total salary reimbursement from the grant
sponsor; and/or
All Residents and Fellows who hold the title of “Chief Resident” and who remain
employed with the University for an additional year after the completion of their
residency program; and/or
All Residents and Fellows whose non-ACGME Fellowship Program expressly
requires the devotion of part of their University duties to service as an “attending
of record”; and/or
3

All supervisory, managerial, confidential, and/or short-term employees as defined
in Section 2 of the Illinois Educational Labor Relations Act, 115 ILCS 511, et
seq., as that statute may be amended from time to time.
B. This exclusive representation is for purposes of determining appropriate ranges
of compensation or rates of compensation, hours, and other conditions of
employment.
C. Unless expressly stated or implied otherwise the term “Resident” in this
Agreement is intended to refer to any member of the bargaining unit, including
both Residents and Fellows.
1.02 Interpretation of Agreement
A. Unless expressly stated in this Agreement that particular contract language is
intended to supersede, this Agreement is subject to and incorporates by
reference: (1) applicable Federal and State laws, as they may be amended from
time to time; (2) rules and regulations of State Universities Retirement System,
as they may be amended from time to time; (3) the Statutes and Rules
promulgated by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, as they may
be amended from time to time; (4) institutional, common and specialty-specific
program requirements of the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education, as they may be amended from time to time; (5) American Board of
Medical Specialties and its Member Boards and other relevant governing bodies,
as they may be amended from time to time; and (6), the Graduate Medical
Education Policy Manual, as it may be amended from time to time.
B. The Parties agree to interpret this Agreement in harmony with the foregoing so
as to avoid conflict. In the event of any conflict among any of the foregoing and
any provision of this Agreement, the former shall prevail and preempt any
inconsistent terms of the Agreement, except where a deviation from same is set
out in express terms herein. The Employer agrees that during the period of this
Agreement it will notify the union of any proposed changes to any of the policies
and rules addressed in Section A of this Agreement relating to hours, wages, and
conditions of employment which affect the members of the Bargaining Unit and to
comply with its legal obligations in this regard.
C. In accordance with Section 1.02.A above, the express levels of wages, benefits,
amount of leave times, the listed holidays (excludes gift days), the requirement to
provide pagers, supplies, personal protection equipment, lounges/breakrooms,
call rooms and/or any contractual item where the University has agreed to
provide, pay or reimburse the residents for, is intended to supersede any of the
items listed in Section 1.02.A to the extent allowable by applicable law with
respect to reducing the agreed to contractual levels or amounts. In the event that
there is an increase from the contractual levels for any of the items listed in
4

Section 1.02.A above, the employees covered by this agreement will have those
item(s) increased on the same date that it is increased for other University
employees.
Article II
Access
2.01 Union Access
The parties acknowledge that it is in their mutual interest that designated union
representatives be granted reasonable access to University facilities for the purpose of
investigating and discussing grievances and workplace-related complaints. Access is
limited to private, non-restricted and non-patient care areas when no visitors, family or
patients are present, may not impact normal operations, and may not impact assigned
duties and responsibilities of the residents or impact or delay patient care. Subject to
the requirements in this article, access will not be unreasonably denied.
a. Patient care areas include but are not limited to: nursing stations, patient
conference rooms, patient floor and operating room area corridors, patient
rooms, operating rooms, laboratories, clinic examination rooms, and other
treatment, patient and clinical care areas.
b. Further, access will be granted only if:
i. The union representative advises UIH’s Employee Relations Office
and the applicable unit(s) of the name of the union representative and the
time and places to be visited at least 12 hours before such visit. Advance
notice need not be given for representational purposes, such as
disciplinary meetings, grievance meetings, or pre-scheduled orientation
meetings.
ii. The union representative checks in with unit management before
entering the unit and does not linger in the unit.
iii. Any union representative who is not a UIC employee must obtain the
required identification badge before entering the facility and comply with
all access policies, rules and procedures, including signing any
appropriate Nondisclosure Agreement (NDA) to protect personal health
information (PHI) in accordance with UI Health requirements and will
follow all vaccination requirements. Where operational requirements or
other restrictions do not permit access, the University reserves the right to
designate the place of the meeting and/or to require a University
representative to accompany the union representative while in transit
through patient care areas.
5

2.02 Union Activity
The Union and its members will not solicit membership or carry on representational
activity with employees of Employer when they are engaged in clinical care activities
and operations will not be affected; provided, however, that an employee of the
Employer designated by the Union to handle such matters may, with permission of their
program director, leave their assigned work to investigate a grievance arising within this
negotiation unit and to present matters as authorized herein.
2.03 Union List of Representatives
The union will furnish the University with a written list of all union representatives and
officers who are authorized by the union to conduct union business. This list shall be
maintained in a timely manner and any changes, additions or deletions to the list shall
be made in writing to the University.
2.04 Union Use of Meeting Rooms
The union shall be granted reasonable use of designated meeting rooms to hold events
when Residents are not engaged in clinical care activities and operations will not be
affected to discuss and/or hold events for the purpose of conducting union business,
including but not limited to, ratification votes, delegation elections and grievance
investigations. Such use shall be arranged in advance as much as possible, and, in
accordance with local access rules and regulations; requests shall not be unreasonably
denied. Meeting room requests must be made at least 48 hours in advance. Room
reservations shall not be canceled by the University except for unforeseen
circumstances. If a reserved room is canceled, the University will provide a comparable
alternative as soon as possible.
2.05 Meeting with Residents
The University will also provide reasonable access to meeting rooms or other space in
non-patient care areas so that union representatives can meet with residents provided
enough notice is given. Union representatives shall not contact residents in, linger in, or
use patient care areas for the purpose of conducting union business.
2.06 Non-Interference with Care
Residents shall only engage in union-related activities, consistent with applicable law,
when they are not engaged in clinical care activities and operations will not be affected
in non-restricted and non-patient care areas. Residents will inform their supervising
attending, chief resident or Program Director if they will be away from their assigned
area, or not performing clinical care activities for any substantial period of time due to
union related activities.
Residents shall only engage in union-related activities consistent with applicable law,
when they are not engaged in clinical care activities, when operations will not be
6

affected and only in non-restricted and non-patient care areas. Residents retain any
legally protected rights to engage in Union conversations.
2.07 Bulletin Boards
The Union may use bulletin boards designated by UI Health to communicate with
bargaining unit employees, as permitted by law. The Employer will provide reasonable
bulletin board access to the Union. Representatives of the Union will be allowed to post
on bulletin boards and distribute materials provided no inflammatory, non-union,
advertising or political endorsements are posted or distributed. Standard notices such
as meeting, officer or other routine announcements will not need to be approved. One
(1) actual copy of all materials will be emailed to UI Health’s Labor Relations Office at
the time of or before posting if the notice contains material other than the routine
announcements referenced above.
Article III
Ancillary Staffing
3.01 Ancillary Duties
The University will provide support services and develop health care delivery systems to
minimize residents’/fellows’ work that is extraneous to their program(s)’ educational
goals and objectives, and to ensure that residents’/fellows’ educational experience is
not compromised by excessive reliance on residents/fellows to fulfill non-physician
service obligations.
3.02 Non-Physician Duties
Non-physician obligations are those duties which in most institutions are performed by
nursing and allied health professionals, transport services, or clerical staff. While it is
understood that residents may be expected to do any of these things on occasion when
the need arises, these activities should not be performed by residents routinely and
must be kept to a minimum to optimize resident education.
3.03 Patient Caps & Risk Pools
Department patient caps and back up risk pools are determined at the discretion of
management. Residents may discuss patient caps and back up risk pools with the
Program Evaluation Committee at any time. Management agrees to give full
consideration to the input of Residents prior to permanently altering the Department
patient caps or back up risk pools, except for emergency conditions beyond the control
of the University. Department patient caps and back up risk pools shall be a standing
agenda item during the Labor Management meeting in accordance with Article VII.
7

3.04 Core Faculty
The University will take all reasonable measures to ensure the teaching departments
will be staffed with core faculty and or the core faculty-resident ratio consistent with
ACGME requirements.
Article IV
Inclusivity and Non-Discrimination
4.01 Commitment to Diversity
The Union and University affirm their joint commitment that all programs engage in
practices that focus on mission-driven, ongoing, systematic recruitment and retention of
a diverse and inclusive workforce of residents and fellows.
The University affirms its commitment to strategic initiatives related to diversity, equity,
and inclusion and will provide comprehensive information about this commitment upon
reasonable request.
The University is a diverse community composed of individuals having many
perspectives and identities. We come from a multitude of backgrounds and
experiences, with at-times distinct needs and goals. We recognize that to create an
inclusive and intellectually vibrant community, we must understand and value both our
individual differences and our common ground. The University Principles of Community
is an aspirational statement that embodies this commitment and reflects the ideals we
seek to uphold.
4.02 Non-Discrimination
The Union and the University agree to work together to promote diversity, equity and
inclusion and such topics shall be on the agenda, upon request, at quarterly Labor
Management Committee meetings.
4.03 Academic Excellence
Consistent with the provisions of applicable state and federal law or University policies,
the University will not engage in discrimination or harassment against any person
because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, order
of protection status, genetic information, disability, pregnancy, sexual orientation
including gender identity, unfavorable discharge from the military or status as a
protected veteran and will comply with all federal and state nondiscrimination, equal
opportunity and affirmative action laws, orders and regulations. This nondiscrimination
policy applies to admissions, employment, access to and treatment in the programs and
activities of the University.
8

4.04 Fair & Respectful Treatment
The University is committed to creating and maintaining a community dedicated to the
advancement, application and transmission of knowledge through academic excellence,
in an atmosphere free of harassment, exploitation or intimidation.
The University and the Union recognize that fair and respectful treatment of Residents
promotes a work environment and organizational culture in support of the values of the
Graduate Medical Education Training Programs. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to change established University policies and practices about political
expression and/or freedom of speech.
4.05 Alleged Violations & Complaints
Complaints alleging violations of this article are governed by and should be reported as
soon as possible to UIC’s Office of Access and Equity. Further, the University
encourages, but in no way requires, a resident to also reach out on any such issues as
soon as possible to the Graduate Medical Education Confidential Resident Hotline or
the Confidential Reporting Form on the GME website.
Article V
Employee List and Orientation
5.01 Incoming Resident List
The University shall provide the union with an electronic list of incoming Residents and
Residents who have completed a residency training or fellowship program each
academic year by on or before June 1.
5.02 Information on List
The list referenced in Section 5.01 shall include, names, personal email, address,
phone number, work email address, department, and postgraduate year. Residents may
be informed that such information will be provided to the union.
5.03 List of Bargaining Unit
A complete list of employees in the bargaining unit including, if available, names,
personal email address, phone number, work email address, department and
postgraduate year shall be provided to the Union by November 15 and March 15 of
each year.
5.04 New Resident Orientation
During orientations for new Residents, the union shall be granted up to sixty (60)
minutes to give a presentation to residents. The union shall be provided the use of one
9

information table at or near orientation. The union must be provided with a schedule of
annual, general orientations at least two weeks in advance.
During new employee orientation, the union may provide the following materials
including but not limited to a copy of the collective bargaining agreement, union
membership card, a list of chapter leaders with contact information, as well as any other
informational materials related to the union.
Article VI
Employee Health, Safety and Security
6.01 Employee Health, Safety and Security
The University will provide a healthy and safe work environment for the Residents, as
required by state and federal health and safety laws. To achieve these goals, the
University agrees to:
a) Ensure that literature, seminars, and other educational tools prepared
by the infection control program will be made available to Residents
when appropriate. The protocols for bloodborne pathogens, developed
by the infection control program, shall be given to the Residents.
Residents shall be educated on the University’s needle-stick protocols
and the University shall ensure that proper follow-up and treatment is
available to Residents at no cost. Residents will have access to the
University’s occupational health services for any occupational
exposure/injury. If an exposure/injury occurs at an affiliate, the
Resident should follow the affiliate’s protocols for treatment/evaluation.
In the event that an exposure/injury requires treatment/evaluation that
is not reasonably available at the University or affiliate, the Resident
may proceed to the closest emergency room and obtain initial
evaluation and any indicated treatment. The University shall be
responsible for all reasonably incurred costs as a result of treatment/
evaluation for a workplace exposure/injury.
b) Provide any required personal protection equipment including but not
limited to masks, gloves, gowns, goggles, lead gowns and x-ray lead
goggles, thyroid guards, access to eye wash stations, and any other
appropriate equipment as needed at each assigned patient care
location.
c) Provide appropriate security for Residents and their property in all
areas of work assignment and travel throughout hospital complexes.
Such security shall include emergency rooms, clinics, and all other
patient care areas, and shall extend to hospital parking, and on-call
rooms.
10

Article VII
Labor Management Meetings
7.01 Labor Management Meetings
In the interest of fostering a cooperative approach to resolving problems, the Union and
the University shall meet at least three times annually during the term of this
Agreement. Additional meetings may be requested by either party, to deal with
unforeseen circumstances. Each party may designate three (3) representatives to
attend the meetings and the parties may agree on additional representatives.
Bargaining unit members with an interest in the agenda may attend the meetings as
non-participatory observers. These meetings will occur at a mutually acceptable time,
date and place on the University campus and meeting times may occur outside of
normal business hours. The Union shall contact GME Labor Relations to initiate
scheduling of the meetings. Agenda items and a list of attendees should be proposed
and determined by mutual agreement no later than one week prior to the meeting date.
Article VIII
Lactation Accommodation
8.01 Lactation Accommodation
“Employee only”, lactation rooms or other comparable space, for the express
purpose of expressing and storing breast milk, in accordance with applicable
laws, shall be provided in reasonable proximity to the work area that is
appropriate for safe patient care.
If no such space exists in reasonable proximity to the employee’s work area
that is appropriate for safe patient care, the Program Director will designate
an appropriate temporary space for employee use only for the Resident to
use for the purpose of expressing and storing breast milk. The University will
allow adequate time for a Resident to express breast milk. Residents may
participate in the University’s Lactation Support Program (LSP).
Article IX
Liability/Malpractice Insurance
9.01 Liability/Malpractice Insurance
Liability and medical malpractice coverage will be provided in accordance with the terms
of the University’s insurance plans (as well as the plans of any offsite entities where
residents rotate, if the University plans do not apply) for claims filed for professional
activities undertaken in the scope of employment. Residents are only covered for
activities performed within the scope of their formal program and approved affiliations.
This specifically excludes coverage for external activities. Residents contacted or
notified of any claim, complaint, or lawsuit arising from the Resident’s activities within
the course and scope of their University duties shall immediately notify the UIC GME
11

office. The Liability and Medical malpractice insurance plans provide occurrence-based
(rather than claims-based) coverage.
Article X
Management Rights
10.01 Management Rights
The University has the exclusive and sole right to manage all aspects of the University,
including all operations and programs and, in particular, its GME residency program.
The parties agree that all rights not specifically granted in this Agreement are expressly
and solely reserved to the University, including but not limited to the following:
1. To establish, direct, administer and control the University’s missions,
programs, objectives, activities, resources, priorities and operations;
2. To manage operations in the hospital, clinics, offices and all other facilities
and sub-units;
3. To adopt and amend budgets and make budgetary allocations or
reallocations affecting the University as a whole or any of its sub-units;
4. To take whatever actions are necessary in the event of an internal or
external disaster, weather emergencies or where patient or employee
safety requires deviations from normal operations;
5. To subcontract all or any portion of operations or programs;
6. To determine whether to relocate, reorganize or discontinue any
operations or programs;
7. To introduce, alter, extend or discontinue existing methods, programs,
equipment, facilities and locations of operations or programs;
8. To determine or modify the number, qualifications, eligibility and selection
of residents;
9. To determine or modify the standards and qualifications for advancement
through the residency program, including in regard to performance
evaluations and the processes and criteria by which performance is
evaluated, unless prohibited by ACGME requirements;
10. To determine or modify scheduling, responsibilities, assignments and work
locations of residents;
11. To determine or modify staffing levels and the coverage for each service,
shift, and department;
12. To determine or modify hours of work, within ACGME limits;
13. To determine or modify learning, training, curriculum and graduation
requirements, unless prohibited by ACGME requirements;
14. To determine or modify and require residents to follow all applicable
procedures, rules, regulations, standards of performance and standards of
conduct; and
15. To remediate, discipline or dismiss residents from a training program,
however no Resident shall be disciplined or removed from the program
without due process under the ACGME and GME appeal procedures. All
12

Residents shall be entitled to one representative of their choosing during
any disciplinary or appeals meeting, or procedure.
10.02 Not All Inclusive
The above list of management rights is not exhaustive or exclusive and, in fact,
assumes other management rights not specified. The exercise or non-exercise of any
management right on any particular occasion will not constitute a waiver of any such
rights in the future.
10.03 Academic Decisions
Without placing any limits on the above-enumerated rights, the University has the sole
and exclusive authority to make all decisions that affect or relate to any academic
(including all ACGME core competencies, as may be amended from time to time),
patient care or clinical issues or judgments. All such decisions may be made at the sole
discretion of the University, are outside of the scope of bargaining, and are not subject
to the grievance arbitration procedures in this Agreement.
10.04 Union Rights
The Union shall retain all rights as specified in Article 1, Section 1.02.B of this
Agreement.
10.05 Rules, Policies, & Practices
Residents must comply with all facility-specific policies, rules or practices at training
facilities/rotation sites over which the University does not have operational authority.
Article XI
Leaves
11.01 General Leave
This Article sets forth the general criteria for various leaves of absence, with or without
pay. Specific questions about any form of leave in this Article and/or its impact on the
Resident’s program requirements should be directed to the Graduate Medical Education
(GME) Office. In the event the GME Office cannot answer the Resident’s questions it
will direct the Resident to the appropriate University resource.
11.02 Applicable State or Federal Law
If applicable state or federal law requires the University to offer any leave in a manner
that would be more generous to employees than is currently provided in this Article, the
University will comply with the law.
13

11.03 Military Caregiver Leave
An eligible Resident who is required to care for a family member or “next of kin” who is a
“covered service member” undergoing medical treatment, recuperation or therapy for a
serious injury or illness shall be granted FML of up to twenty-six (26) workweeks during
a single 12-month leave period. The Resident must be a spouse, domestic partner,
parent, child, or next of kin of the covered service member to be eligible for this type of
leave. The Resident is required to provide a copy of the covered service member’s
active duty orders.
11.04 Qualifying Exigency Leave
An eligible Resident who is the spouse, domestic partner, child or parent of a military
member is eligible to attend to any “qualifying exigency” while the military member is on
“covered active duty or call to covered active duty status” (or has been notified of an
impending call/order to covered active duty). An eligible Resident is entitled to up to
twelve (12) workweeks of Qualifying Exigency leave during a calendar year, which may
be taken on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis. The Resident is required to
provide a copy of the military member’s active duty orders.
11.05 Leave for Military Service
Residents are eligible for up to thirty (30) days of military leave with pay while engaged
in the performance of military duty each academic year. All benefit coverage will
continue during paid military leave. Absence from the training program to meet military
service obligations must be communicated to the program director and/or department
with as much notice as possible.
11.06 Leave for Jury Duty
A Resident called to Jury Duty will receive regular compensation for time served. The
program director and/or department must be notified as soon as a jury summons is
received. Only the court, pursuant to the procedure outlined in the Jury Summons
Notice, can grant deferment or excused absence from jury service. The Resident may
request from the Training Program Director a letter verifying the Resident’s participation
in the program to be submitted to the court if requesting to be excused.
11.07 New Parent Leave
a) The University shall provide six (6) workweeks of parental leave with pay each
academic year to a parent to allow them to bond with a newborn child or child
recently placed via adoption, provided the leave takes place within one year of the
birth of the child or placement of the child with the Resident or Fellow. The intent is
that the six (6) workweeks of parental leave is the maximum amount of leave per
pregnancy/adoption event. For example, a Resident having twins would not receive
twelve (12) workweeks. A Resident would also not receive another six (6)
14

workweeks of parental leave if the leave is used in two different academic years.
Residents will be required to follow the University of Illinois Parental Leave Policy
when applying for this benefit. If the Resident or Fellow is eligible for leave under
the Family and Medical Leave Act and/or the any applicable State Law, parental
leave can extend to up to twelve (12) workweeks. If the Resident or Fellow wishes to
be paid for workdays beyond the paid entitlement in paragraph 1 during parental
leave, the Resident or Fellow may use accumulated sick and/or vacation time for
such pay.
b) Training program leadership will work with Residents/Fellows who, due to parental
leave, need to make up time, as required by ACGME for graduation and/or board
certification. The University will not require Residents to make up time unless
required by ACGME, or the certifying board.
11.08 Family and Medical Leave (FML)
Pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), or any applicable state
leave laws, an eligible Resident will be granted up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave
in a 12-month period.
11.09 Bereavement Leave
A Resident shall receive (5) paid days for bereavement purposes in the event
of the death of the Resident’s immediate family members per University
policies and rules, as they may be amended from time to time, and applicable
state law.
11.10 Sick Leave
Residents shall accrue sick leave with compensation at the rate of twenty-four
(24) days per academic year. Sick leave may be taken pursuant to University
policies and rules, as they may be amended from time to time. In addition,
vacation leave may be used to cover sick leave that exceeds available sick
time. Unused sick leave will roll over to the following academic year.
Sick Leave may be used at the discretion of the resident for unpaid parental
leave, unpaid leaves of absence, unpaid Family Medical Leaves, or any
leaves covered by this Article.
Residents will not be required to make up time for Leaves granted under this Article if
allowed by ACGME program guidelines or by the certifying board.
15

Article XII
Release Time
12.01 New Hire Orientation
Upon advance request, for each new hire orientation session, up to three Residents
shall be granted release time.
12.02 CIR National Convention
Upon an advance notice of at least thirty (30) days, the University will release from work
and not schedule elected CIR delegates for duty so that they can attend the CIR’s
annual convention.
12.03 CIR Executive Committee
Upon advance request of at least 60 days, the University will make reasonable efforts
not to schedule any union member elected or appointed to CIR’s Executive committee
for duty so that they can attend the aforementioned committee’s quarterly meetings.
12.04 Schedule Adherence
All provisions of this article are subject to educational, operational and patient care
needs, as determined by the University, and Residents must adhere at all times to
established schedules. Upon reasonable advance notice, any request for release time
as stated above shall not be unreasonably denied.
Article XIII
Resident Lounges and Call Rooms
13.01 Resident Lounges
The University will work with the Union through the Wellness Committee to provide
access for all Residents to a lounge or breakroom at the University as soon as
reasonably practicable. It is the intent of the parties that the lounge and/or breakroom
will include amenities such as a hospital phone, microwave, refrigerator, utensils, coffee
machine, seating, and computers with internet access and will be appropriately sized to
accommodate the respective resident group.
13.02 Call Rooms
The University will provide call rooms at the University that ensure adequate safe, quiet,
and clean, sleep and rest facilities. The call rooms will be subject to daily housekeeping
services, including on weekends and holidays and will not be accessible to the general
public.
16

Article XIV
Resident Wellbeing
14.01 Resident Wellbeing Committee
A committee on Resident Wellbeing shall be established to serve as an advisory body
to the Associate Dean of GME or designee, on wellbeing policies, initiatives and burnout
prevention. The Committee shall consist of no fewer than five Resident members.
14.02 Scheduled Days Off
Residents must be scheduled for a minimum of one day in seven free of clinical work
and required education (when averaged over four weeks). At-home call cannot be
assigned on these free days. Residents will not be required to make up for used sick
days, beyond what is required by ACGME for graduation and applicable board
certification. The Program Director shall make every effort to not require attendance at
work events or trainings for any Resident on their scheduled day off. In the event that
training, testing, or any work related activity is required on a scheduled day off, the
Resident will be offered another day off within the same scheduling block when
operationally feasible as determined by the Program Director , when not feasible the
day off will be offered in another scheduling block within the same academic year, but in
no case will the Resident receive less than the ACGME guaranteed four (4) days off
averaged over any twenty-eight day period. Residents will not be required to use
vacation time off to attend required board examinations.
14.03 Recreation Center
The University will provide access to the recreation center at the student discounted
rate.
14.04 Disaster or Pandemic Declaration
If the University declares, or if the University is subject to a declaration made by the
state, federal or municipal government agency with the power to do so, declares a
“disaster” related to infectious disease or pandemic based on guidance from CDPH,
CDC, IDPH or FEMA, the University and Union agree to meet and discuss wage
differentials if a disaster is declared.
Article XV
Child Care
15.01 Child Care
All Residents with children will continue to be eligible and will receive the additional
stipend as partial reimbursement for the cost of health insurance for dependents under
GME policy 12.07 Benefits A.1.a.
17

Article XVI
Grievance and Arbitration
16.01 Grievance Definitions
a) A grievance is defined as a complaint filed by an employee or the Union alleging
that the University breached a specific provision of this Agreement and the
complaint does not implicate any decisions that affect or relate to any academic
(including all ACGME core competencies, as may be amended from time to
time), patient care or clinical issues or judgments.
b) All matters regarding probation, suspension, corrective action, non-promotion
and non-renewal of resident agreements and termination/dismissal are not
subject to this grievance and arbitration article of the contract and are to be
reviewed solely as specified in GME policy on Remediation and Corrective
Actions (Policy 10), as may be amended from time to time, and in GME Policy
related to Grievances and Appeals (Policy 11), as may be amended from time
to time. The University will not discipline a resident without just cause.
However, any matters that affect or relate to any academic (including all
ACGME core competencies, as may be amended from time to time), patient
care or clinical issues or judgments are not subject to the filing of a grievance
under this grievance/arbitration process.
16.02 General Provisions.
a) Representation. Each resident shall have the right to Union representation at
grievance meetings and arbitration hearings, or in accordance with all rights under
applicable law.
b) Discrimination/Harassment – If a grievance contains allegations of discrimination or
harassment, the University may refer the grievance to the campus Office of Access and
Equity or other official or office designated by the Chancellor, in an effort to resolve the
matter.
c) Time Limits Failure to file a grievance or appeal a grievance within the time periods
specified below shall constitute a waiver of the grievance and the appeal process. If the
University fails to respond to a grievance within the applicable time periods specified
below, the grievant may appeal the grievance to the next step of the grievance process
within fourteen (14) calendar days if the University fails to answer the grievance on the
final date on which the University’s response was due.
16.03 Grievance Procedure
18

Informal Step
A resident who alleges the University has breached a term of this Agreement is strongly
encouraged to discuss the matter with the resident’s designated supervisor in an effort
to settle the problem informally. Such informal discussions shall have no effect upon the
time limits set forth in this Agreement. The University will not negotiate terms and
conditions of employment regarding residents, as defined by law, without their Union
representative present. This procedure, if followed in good faith by both parties, should
lead to a fair and prompt solution to most of the University/resident problems.
Step One
Regardless of whether a grievable matter is sought to be resolved through informal
discussion, a resident who alleges the University has breached a specific term of this
Agreement shall have twenty-eight (28) calendar days to file a grievance, calculated
from the date of the occurrence leading to the grievance or twenty-eight (28) calendar
days after the resident or Union should reasonably have known of the occurrence
leading to the grievance, whichever is earlier. To be considered, a grievance must
allege a breach of a specific term of this Agreement, be in written form, signed by the
resident(s) or representative and filed with the resident’s department.
The written grievance must contain: the date of the violation, a specific description of
the dispute, the facts of the case, the section(s) of the Agreement alleged to have been
violated, and the relief sought. The department will give a written decision on the
grievance within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receipt of the grievance or within
twenty-eight (28) calendar days of a meeting, if the department chooses to hold one,
whichever is later.
Step Two
In the event the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, the decision may be appealed in
writing to the designated representative of the College of Medicine. The appeal must be
filed within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Step 1 decision is received or due,
whichever occurs first. Any decision at Step 1 that is not appealed within fourteen (14)
calendar days after it is received or due shall be considered binding and is not
appealable. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Chancellor (or designee) will offer a hearing
to the grievant, conduct any investigation that is deemed necessary, and issue a written
decision on the grievance within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after hearing of the
appeal.
19

Step Three
In the event the grievance is not resolved at Step 2, the decision may be appealed in
writing to the University of Illinois – System Level grievance hearing officer. The appeal
must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Step 2 decision is received or
due, whichever occurs first. Any decision at Step 2 that is not appealed within fourteen
(14) calendar days after it is received or due shall be considered binding and is not
appealable. If a grievance has been appealed to Step 3, the University of Illinois –
System Level grievance hearing officer may hold a hearing. Within twenty-eight (28)
calendar days after receipt of the appeal or within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after
the hearing, whichever is later, the University of Illinois – System Level grievance
hearing officer shall issue a written decision to the parties involved.
16.04 Arbitration
a) Arbitration Demand. In the event the grievance is not resolved at Step 3, the Union
(and the Union only) may submit the grievance to arbitration, provided written notice of
intent to arbitrate is delivered to the University of Illinois – System Level grievance
hearing officer within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after the Step 3 response is
received or due, whichever occurs first and provided arbitration is not precluded under
this Agreement.
b) Selection of Arbitrator. Upon submission of a request for arbitration, the parties
should attempt to agree upon an arbitrator. If the parties are unable to agree upon an
arbitrator, the Union may request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services
(FMCS) to submit a panel of seven (7) arbitrators. Each party retains the right to reject
one panel in its entirety and request that a new panel be provided. The parties shall
alternate in striking names (with the University striking first) and the person remaining
shall be the arbitrator. The parties shall promptly notify the arbitrator of the selection.
c) Decision. The arbitrator shall issue a decision promptly. The arbitrator’s decision shall
be in writing and shall set forth the arbitrator’s findings of fact, reasoning, and
conclusions on the issues submitted. The arbitrator’s authority shall be limited to
determining whether the University has violated arbitrable provisions of this Agreement.
The arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction or authority to add to, delete from, ignore or
modify in any way the provisions of this Agreement. The decision of the arbitrator shall
be final and binding on the grievant, University and the Union.
20

The arbitrator shall not have jurisdiction or authority to add to, amend, modify, nullify, or
ignore in any way the provisions of this contract nor shall the arbitrator have the
authority to review any academic or clinical judgment. To the extent that the University’s
action is based upon academic or clinical judgment, the arbitrator shall have no
authority or jurisdiction to substitute his/her judgment for that of the University.
d) Arbitration Costs. Costs of the arbitration, including arbitrator fees and court reporter
fees, shall be equally divided between the Union and the University; except, that each
party shall be responsible for their own legal fees and any transcript it may order.
Article XVII
Health Benefits
17.01 General Benefits
Employee benefits (e.g., medical, hospital, prescription, dental, vision, disability, life,
retirement, and inter-institutional reciprocity) will be provided on the same basis as they
are provided for other University employees of the State of Illinois and shall be as set
forth in the University’s policies and rules, as they may be amended from time to time,
and summary plan descriptions for the individual benefit plan(s). Benefits under the
control of the Employer will not be diminished during the life of this Agreement, or any
extension thereof and improvements in such benefits will be made applicable to the
Residents and Fellows covered by this agreement on the same date that such
improvements are made applicable to other employees of the Employer.
Residents are eligible for a qualified status change, which must be filed within thirty (30)
days of the qualifying event.
17.02 Health, Dental and Vision Insurance
1. Eligibility for coverage is based on the Resident’s active status for the
academic year beginning each July 1, or upon their first day of employment,
whichever occurs first.
2. Residents will be subject to the selected coverage category and co-pay
schedule (single, adult + children, two adults or family) as required by the
Plan.
3. An employee on an approved Family and Medical Leave (FML) shall be
entitled, if eligible, to continue participation in health benefit coverage
(medical, dental, and vision) as if on pay status.
4. The University will offer a Flexible Spending Account (FSA) for qualified
medical expenses.
21

17.03 Life, Accident, Disability Insurance
Disability income benefits are available to employees under: (1) the Illinois Worker’s
Compensation and Occupational Diseases Act; (2) the University of Illinois Sick Leave
Plan; and (3) the State Universities Retirement System. Medical and hospital expense
benefits are available under: (1) the Illinois Worker’s Compensation and Occupational
Diseases Act; and (2) the State-paid or University-sponsored Group Health and Life
Insurance Plans. The cost of the benefits under University-sponsored Insurance Plans
and State Universities Retirement System are borne in part by the Employer and in part
by the employee.
17.04 Employee Assistance Program
The University will provide free of charge to the Residents an Employee Assistance
Program for confidential consultation and referrals for treatment. All records of
treatment will be kept in the strictest confidence.
Article XVIII
Holidays
18.01 Paid Holidays
The University recognizes 12 paid holidays for all employees, including:
New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King Day (President delegated)
Memorial Day
Juneteenth
Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
18.02 Floating Holidays/Gift Days
The President has delegated to each Chancellor/Vice President the authority to
designate the remaining four holidays to be observed at each university. Pursuant to
University policies and rules, as they may be amended from time to time, these are
designated as floating holidays that may be used between December 23rd and June
30th, with supervisor approval. Any gift days as designated by the Chancellor/Vice
President of the University.
18.03 Fixed Holidays
To the extent practicable, the Program Director will endeavor to grant at least three of
these fixed Holidays listed in Section 18.01 off subject to operational needs. In the event
that training, testing, or any work-related activity is required on any holiday, the
22

Resident will be offered another day off within the same scheduling block when
operationally feasible as determined by the Program Director, when not operationally
feasible the day off will be offered in another scheduling block within the same
academic year consistent with ACGME.
18.04 Alternate Days Off
For the floating Holidays referenced in Section 18.02, or the alternate day in Section
18.03, reasonable efforts will be made to grant the floating Holiday or alternate day on
the day(s) requested by the Resident, including giving priority to requests for religious
requirements by Residents for observances of religious holidays.
Article XIX
Vacations
19.01 Vacation Leaves
Paid vacation leave shall be twenty (20) days, consisting of twenty-four (24) hour
increments for each day, per academic year. Vacation time shall accrue from year to
year. The total amount of vacation leaves due a Resident will be credited to the
Resident at the beginning of the appointment. As the Resident uses vacation leave, the
leave balance will decrease accordingly. Vacation time shall not be in place of the four
in twenty-eight days off requirement.
19.02 Scheduling Vacations
Vacation leave shall be scheduled by the program pursuant to the program’s written
policies which will be in compliance with each program’s ACGME Program
Requirements and/or certifying board requirements. In scheduling vacation, programs
should take into account any requests for specific dates or blocks of time by individual
Residents, but all parties understand that it may not always be possible to
accommodate a Resident’s requests. When taking vacation in full week increments
Programs shall schedule Residents for seven (7) consecutive days off consisting of five
(5) vacation and two (2) additional days off without a reduction in vacation leave.
19.03 Vacation at Separation of Employment
Upon separation from the University program, any unused vacation time will not carry
over to any other University position but will be cashed out up to 5 days.
19.04 Vacation Preferences
In departments where vacation is predetermined by schedule the Hospital will make a
best faith effort to take into consideration residents’ preference regarding how their days
off are distributed and will be considered as schedules are developed.
23

Article XX
License Reimbursement & Training
20.01 License Reimbursement and Required Training
A. General Eligibility
To be eligible for reimbursement under this provision a Resident or Fellow must
meet both of the following requirements:
1. The Resident or Fellow must be appointed through the Office of
Graduate Medical Education in a residency or fellowship training
program for the relevant academic year; and
2. The Resident or Fellow must have an active appointment on the date
payment was made to the Medical Board of Illinois or Federation of
State Medical Boards.
3. Newly hired Residents, who obtain a new license for their upcoming
training program must provide proof of payment within 30 days by the
Resident to the GME office.
4. The Unrestricted Illinois Medical License must be required by the
Program and approved by the Office of Graduate Medical Education.
Licenses obtained for the purposes of moonlighting are not
reimbursable.
20.02 Medical Licenses
1. New License
To be eligible for reimbursement for a Post Graduate Training License or
Unrestricted Illinois Medical License, including application and processing fees, the
issue date of the license must be within the academic year in which reimbursement
is sought. Only those fees paid directly to the Medical Board of Illinois for licensure
are reimbursable. Reimbursement requests must be made within thirty (30) days.
Other expenses incurred such as those for notary, Live Scan fingerprinting,
photography services, and transcript services, are not eligible for reimbursement.
2. Renewal License
To be eligible for reimbursement for a license renewal, the license expiration date
must be within the academic year in which reimbursement is sought and an
academic year in which the Resident is appointed to a residency or fellowship
training program. Reimbursement requests must be made within thirty (30) days.
24

20.03 USMLE Step III/COMLEX III
1. To be eligible for reimbursement for USMLE Step III/COMLEX III exam
fees, the examination date must occur within the academic year in which
reimbursement is sought.
2. Residents are only eligible to receive reimbursement once during the term
of their employment upon successful completion of the exam.
3. Reimbursement is only for fees paid directly to the National Board of
Osteopathic Medical Examiners or Federation of State Medical Boards.
4. Residents in a preliminary or transitional program are ineligible to receive
reimbursement. In the event that a preliminary or transitional person is
offered and becomes a categorical/advanced University Resident, they
shall be eligible for the step III/Complex III reimbursement.
20.04 Certifications
The University shall coordinate and schedule or reimburse Residents for certifications
required by the Resident Program. Reimbursement requests must be made within thirty
(30) days.
20.05 Journal Submissions
Residents who submit articles to journals, based on training/research obtained at the
University, that require a fee will be reimbursed within thirty (30) days of submission for
the submission fee. Journal submissions are only reimbursable if submitted in
collaboration with a University faculty member or approved by the Program Director.
Article XXI
Electronic Devices
21.01 Pagers
Each Resident shall be provided with a pager. The University will ensure that batteries
for pagers are available at a reasonable number of locations. All Residents shall return
the pager when they end employment with the University or when directed to return the
pager. If pagers are replaced by new equipment required by the University, Residents
shall be provided with this equipment by the University.
21.02 iPhones
Beginning July 1, 2023, the University shall issue WiFi enabled iPhones to Residents for
work use. The iPhones shall be the property of the University and shall be returned
upon separation from the University program. The iPhones shall be distributed
incrementally every six months until full distribution is achieved beginning with
25

Residents in the oldest program year.
Article XXII
Educational Expense Fund and Scholarly Pursuit
22.01 Education Fund
A. Each resident will receive a stipend/allowance per appointment year for
educational support. This educational allowance is in addition to the stipend that
the resident receives as compensation for his/her residency appointment.
B. The educational allowance is distributed each fiscal/academic year as a lump
sum payment via the residents’ paychecks. These funds are taxed as income.
C. Effective July 1, 2022, the education fund will be increased to $2500 for a PGY1
Resident, and $3000 for a PGY2 and above Resident.
D. Effective July 1, 2023, the fund will be divided into twelve equal amounts and
paid to the Residents monthly.
E. The Education and Expense money may be used at the Residents discretion
without the need to submit receipts by the Resident.
22.02 Travel Expenses for Conferences/Presentations
Residents may request to be reimbursed for reasonable expenses for travel, required
materials, registration fees, lodging and food, subject to the University’s travel
guidelines, for scholarly activities, including a presentation at a conference, i.e.,
abstract/publication or poster as presenter. Request for approval must be submitted to
the Program Director at least 30 days in advance of the presentation. The Program
Director shall have the sole discretion to grant or deny, or partially grant/deny, the
request. The Program Director’s decision shall not be subject to the grievance and/or
arbitration procedure under this Agreement. Residents shall receive notification of
approval, or the reason for denial (or partial denial) within 14 days of submission.
22.03 Required Events
For scholarly activities on behalf of the Program for which the Resident is required to
attend by the Program, the Resident shall be reimbursed for travel expenses, required
materials, registration fees, lodging, and food, subject to the University’s travel
guidelines.
22.04 Programs that Provide or Elect to Provide Additional Benefits
Programs may provide additional funds to Residents and Fellows for educational
purposes. The University shall not reduce any additional benefits in place for
Educational Fund and Scholarly Pursuit as of the effective date of this Agreement. Prior
26

to making any increases to said benefits, the University shall provide notice to the Union
prior to implementation; and upon request by the Union, the University shall meet and
discuss the change.
Article XXIII
Educational Time
23.01 Educational Time
The union and the University recognize that education is a key component of the
residency and fellowship programs at the University. Scheduled academic activities,
including but not limited to didactics, conferences, courses, simulations, computer
training sessions, and orientation days, shall be protected to the furthest extent
practicable. During such protected education time, Residents shall be released from
clinical duties to the furthest extent practicable.
Article XXIV
Meal Allowance
24.01 Monthly Meal Allowance
Residents will receive a monthly meal allowance of $100/month or the on call meal
allowance if it results in an amount over the $100/month as provided below.
Programs that provide or elect to provide additional benefits: Some programs, as
of the effective date of this contract, provide meal allowances to Residents and
Fellows that exceed what is provided for by this section. It is not the intent of the
University to reduce these specific meal allowances. Prior to making any
reduction to these additional meal allowances, the University shall provide notice
to the Union prior to implementation; and upon written request by the Union, the
University shall meet and negotiate regarding the change.
24.02 Access to Meals
The University will ensure access to proper meals at all times, at the Hospital or any
rotation location site.
Article XXV
Transportation and Fatigue Mitigation
25.01 Fatigue Mitigation
In the event a Resident is too fatigued to drive home safely at the end of a shift, the
Resident has the following options:
a. Sleep in an available call room until able to drive safely; or
27

b. Utilize a taxi or other transportation service (e.g., Uber, Lyft) to take the
Resident to and/or from the hospital and to and/or from their verifiable
address. The Resident is entitled to seek reimbursement from the University
for the cost of the transportation.
25.02 Transportation Reimbursement
The University will reimburse any resident that elects to use a transportation service
(app-based or taxi) to arrive home instead of driving their own vehicle while fatigued, as
well as to pick up their car or return to work the next day.
25.03 Transportation Verification
The University may impose reasonable rules to verify the use and cost of transportation
under this Article.
Article XXVI
Retirement Plans
26.01 State Administered Plan
All Residents will be enrolled in a University retirement plan as administered by the
State University Retirement System. Retirement benefits are extended pursuant to the
State Universities Retirement System Statute. Information materials about the System
should be consulted and are available from the System 1901 Fox Drive, Champaign,
Illinois 61820 (800-275-7877).
26.02 403b Retirement Savings Plan
The University will provide to all Residents a 403b retirement savings plan, on the same
basis as other University employees.
Article XXVII
Program Closure/Reduction
27.01 Program Closure
In the event of a program closure, the University shall follow all Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) guidelines “regarding program
closure/reduction” by assisting any affected residents in enrolling in another accredited
residency or fellowship training program.
27.02 Accreditation
The Hospital shall take all appropriate steps to try to gain and maintain full accreditation
for all accredited programs.
28

27.03 Timely Notification
The University will notify all affected Residents in a timely manner of any program
reduction (a decrease in the ACGME approved complement) or program closure.
27.04 Completion of Program
In the event of program reduction, the University will allow residents already in an
affected ACGME-accredited program(s) to complete their education at the Sponsoring
Institution or assist them in enrolling in (an)other ACGME-accredited program(s) in
which they can continue their education.
Article XXVIII
Moonlighting
28.01 Moonlighting
Each training program must have a moonlighting policy. The program’s policy and
procedures must comply with the University Moonlighting Policy and procedures. A
Resident must be in good standing with the program and must obtain written permission
from their program director to moonlight internally and/or externally.
Each program policy must contain a method for written pre-approval, monitoring (which
must include the method for tracking hours), and periodic review. Residents must not be
required to engage in moonlighting (internal or external), and this must be clearly stated
in the policy. Each program must demonstrate ongoing compliance with clinical and
educational work hour requirements.
Article XXIX
Uniforms
29.01 Uniforms
The University will provide at the start of employment and at no cost to the Resident the
following:
A. White Coats
Two (2) new long white physician coats in appropriate sizes will be
issued to each Resident.
B. Scrubs
A minimum of two (2) clean sets of scrubs. Hospital-issued scrubs will
be provided to Residents as required by hospital policy.
C. The University shall provide laundering services to all Residents at no
cost for white coats and restricted scrubs at the Hospital.
29

Article XXX
Dues Deduction
30.01 General
The Union will provide to the employer verification that dues deductions have been
authorized by the employee.
Upon receipt from the Union of written authorization from an employee, the Employer
shall deduct the amount of Union dues, and any authorized increase therein, and shall
remit such deductions to the Union at the address designated by the Union in
accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.
The parties acknowledge and agree that the term “written authorization” as provided in
this Agreement includes authorizations created and maintained by use of electronic
records and electronic signatures consistent with state and federal law.
The Union shall advise the Employer of any increase in dues, in writing, at least thirty
(30) days prior to its effective date.
30.02 Indemnification
The Union shall indemnify, defend, and hold the Employer harmless against any claim,
demand, suit, cost, expense, or any other form of liability, including attorneys’ fees and
costs arising from or incurred as a result of any act taken or not taken by the Employer,
its members, officers, agents, employees or representatives in complying with or
carrying out the provisions of this Article; in reliance on any notice, letter, or
authorization forwarded to the Employer by the Union pursuant to this Article; and
including any charge that the Employer failed to discharge any duty owed to its
employees arising out of this Article; provided, however, the Union shall not be
obligated to indemnify the Employer to the extent that any damages occur as a result of
the Employer's negligence. The Employer shall immediately inform the Union of any
appeals or legal actions regarding this Article.
30.03 Procedure
The Employer shall take such steps as may be required to accomplish any wage
withholding authorized or required by this Article and shall do such things as are
necessary to cause said withholding to be remitted to the collective bargaining agent
within thirty (30) calendar days after date of withholding, provided that nothing contained
in this Article shall require the Employer to make any withholding unless and until the
Union has notified the Employer of the address to which the amount so withheld should
be sent and has certified the amount of dues/assessments to be withheld, both within
sufficient time to permit the Employer to carry out its obligations to so withhold. The
amount withheld shall not change until the Union notifies the Employer that different
dues/assessments amounts should be collected.
30

30.04 Other Deductions
The Parties mutually agree that deductions from an employee’s paycheck shall be
made upon showing of a properly signed authorization card allowing such deductions.
The Employer agrees to deduct the actual dollar amount authorized by the employee
and to separately itemize deductions on monthly remittal forms provided to the Union,
provided that the payroll system is capable of handling such deductions.
The Union shall indemnify, defend and hold the Employer harmless against any claim,
demand, suit, cost, expense or any other form of liability, including attorney fees and
costs, arising from, or incurred as a result of any act taken or not taken by the
Employer, its members, officers, agents, employees, or representatives in complying or
carrying out the provisions of this Article.
Article XXXI
Miscellaneous Legal Provisions
31.01 Complete Agreement
Both parties had the opportunity during negotiations to make proposals with respect to
any subject matter not prohibited by law from bargaining. This Agreement sets forth the
full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the matters contained herein. The
University and the Union agree for the term of this Agreement each voluntarily and
unequivocally waives the right and shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with
respect to any subject matter referred to or covered in this Agreement, except as
required by Article 1, Section 1.02.B. However, at the request of either party, the
parties shall bargain over the impact of a decision that affects the wages, hours and
working conditions of Residents.
31.02 Separability
In the event that any part of this Agreement is held to be illegal, invalid, void or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, all of the remaining conditions and
provisions of this Agreement will remain in full force and effect during the term of this
Agreement. In the event that any provision of this Agreement is declared illegal, invalid,
void or unenforceable, the parties agree to meet promptly upon the request of the other
party in an attempt to reach an agreement on a substitute provision.
31.03 Supplemental Agreements
Any agreement(s) which supplement this Agreement shall not be binding or effective for
any purpose whatsoever unless reduced to writing and signed by the University and the
Union.
31

Article XXXII
No Strikes, No Lockouts
32.01 No Strikes, No Lockouts
This Agreement contains a grievance resolution procedure which provides for final and
binding arbitration of disputes concerning the interpretation of this Agreement.
Therefore, during the term of this Agreement, there shall be no strikes, work stoppages,
slowdowns or sympathy strikes.
No officer or representative of the Union shall authorize, institute, instigate, aid or
condone any such activities by members of the bargaining unit. The Union further
agrees that it will take reasonable actions which are within its power to advise
employees engaged in a strike or work stoppage in violation of the terms of this
Agreement to return to work; such reasonable actions include the Union, through its
officials, disavowing in writing any such action or interference and advising that
Residents and Fellows engaged in such activity are in violation of this agreement and
should immediately return to work and cease the violation.
Residents who violate this article may be subject to disciplinary action under the terms
of this Agreement.
In consideration of this “no strike pledge”, the University will pledge not to lock out
employees during the term of this Agreement.
Article XXXIII
Salaries
33.01 Determination of Salary
1. Each Resident or Fellow shall be placed on the salary step that corresponds to
the number of years of training required for Board Certification or other
certification in the specialty. Prior GME training that is not required for the current
specialty/ subspecialty shall not result in a higher step or level of pay. Each
program may define their entry step level, with approval of the GME Office.
2. Residents and Fellows may not be paid at a rate lower than the published salary
scale. However, Residents and Fellows may be paid above scale at the sole
discretion of their Department and in accordance with established institutional
practice.
3. In programs where there is one administrative chief (“Chief”) assigned by the
University, that person will be paid one PGY above their current PGY level. In
programs where there are two or three assigned Chiefs, each Chief will be paid
at the rate of their PGY plus a differential of the next PGY level divided by the
number of Chiefs. In programs with four or more Chiefs assigned, the differential
32

amount will be based on two PGY levels above divided by the number of Chiefs,
with each Chief being paid a minimum of $675 dollars additional per year.
4. The Residents Salary will begin no later than the first day of orientation.
33.02 Salary Increases
1. Effective July 1, 2022, the University shall provide a 2% market adjustment to
Resident salaries (as shown in Appendix A). Residents will receive the increase
retroactive to July 1, 2022 or the date of employment, whichever is later.
2. Effective July 1, 2022, the University shall increase current salaries by 4%.
Residents will receive the increase retroactive to July 1, 2022 or the date of
employment, whichever is later.
3. Effective July 1, 2023, the University shall increase salaries by 4%.
4. Effective July 1, 2024, the University shall increase salaries by 4%.
5. Effective July 1, 2025, the University shall increase salaries by 4.5%.
Article XXXIV
Duration
34.01 Duration
This Agreement shall become effective as of July 1, 2022 and, unless otherwise
specifically provided herein, shall remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2026.
This Agreement shall automatically be renewed from year-to-year thereafter unless
either party notifies the other in writing not more than one hundred and eighty (180)
days nor less than ninety (90) days prior to June 30, 2026 or June 30th of a subsequent
year in the event of its automatic renewal, that it desires to modify its terms.
33

19 April 23

Appendix A
Salary Chart
2.00% 4.00% 4.00% 4.00% 4.50%
Market
Adjusted
PGY Year Base 1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year
1 $61,087.80 $63,531.31 $66,072.56 $68,715.47 $71,807.66
2 $63,235.92 $65,765.36 $68,395.97 $71,131.81 $74,332.74
3 $65,395.26 $68,011.07 $70,731.51 $73,560.77 $76,871.01
4 $67,783.08 $70,494.40 $73,314.18 $76,246.75 $79,677.85
5 $70,613.58 $73,438.12 $76,375.65 $79,430.67 $83,005.05
6 $74,850.39 $77,844.41 $80,958.19 $84,196.51 $87,985.36
7 $75,820.68 $78,853.51 $82,007.65 $85,287.95 $89,125.91
8 $78,267.66 $81,398.37 $84,654.30 $88,040.47 $92,002.29
35

Please check appropriate box(es): Please refer to this number (which will be assigned by
BOT Office) for any future transactions regarding this
Receivable to University
contract, i.e., amendments, inquiries, etc.
Payable by University
NewContract Initial CBA Contract number ___________________________
Amendment to Contract No.
CONTRACT
INTERNAL APPROVAL FORM
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO
Unit/Department: UIC Human Resources, Labor & Employee Relations
Contact Person: Michelle Jackson Phone: 312-413-4788
Address: 715 S. Wood Street Room 123, Chicago, IL 60612 Mail Code: 862
Brief Description of Services:UIC-Committee of Interns and Residents/SEIU, Local 1957CBA 2022-26 InitialCollective
Bargaining Agreement
Effective Date: July 1. 2023 Termination Date: June30, 2026
APPROVALS: Date of Board of Trustees Approval,if Required:
APPROVALS
3/30/2023
Associate Director Labor and Employee Relations and Chief Negotiator Date
ExecutiveDirectorof Laborand Special Counsel Date
Office of University Counsel Date
Senior Associate Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer
Date
Comptroller Date
Contracts Processing Office (107 Coble Hall) Date Received: By:
Your Comments:
IRMPlAea sRe YprAoNvi d(sei agtn laetausrte 4 s oerciugrienda)l c o p i esof the agreement for sig n a t u r e s a n d forward all origin a l s t o B o n i t a H i g g e r s o n i n
IrmUan Rivyearnsi,tyC Hhiuemf Nane gRoetsioautorrces. Date
The University Contract Records Officewill retain one
fully executed original copy of the contract on behalf of
the Board of Trustees Office. Thank you.

